Colloidal construction of porous polysaccharide-supported cadmium sulphide  Graphical abstract Highlights • The preparation of high surface area, mesoporous cubic CdS/starch hybrids is presented. • A colloidal starch gel confines CdS growth to small, cubic nanoparticles (<40nm). • The method allows very high CdS loadings (i.e. 1:1wt/wt). • The gel and CdS phase interact to maintain surface and porosity of original gel. • The green route is applicable to a range of quantum dots and polysaccharide gels. Abstract A method for preparing CdS nanoparticles within the porous confines of a mesoporous starch gel is described. This method utilises the combined colloidal and flexible chemical nature of a porous polysaccharide (i.e. starch) gel to limit CdS growth. The resulting hybrid gels can be dried to produce CdS/starch materials with high surface areas, predominantly mesoporous characteristics and scope for high CdS loading. The synthesis is conducted in aqueous alcoholic solutions without the need for expensive preparation techniques or additional protection/templating strategies. Materials were prepared at increasing CdS loadings on the starch gel, which confined nanoparticle growth and directed size/surface coverage, dispersion and UV-vis absorption profile. The resulting powders presented large mesopore domains with high volumes (pore diameters>10nm; Vmeso>0.5cm3g-1) and surface areas (SBET>170m2g-1), interestingly effectively increasing with CdS loading. The synthesised CdS nanoparticles were characterised in the 5-40nm range of a cubic crystalline structure, increasing in size with loading. A complete surface coverage of the starch gel structure occurs at a CdS/starch ratio=1 (w/w), allowing the synthesis of a unique mesoporous CdS/polysaccharide hybrid. The presented route is simple, green and in principle extendable to a wide range of QDs and polysaccharide gels, whereby the porous polysaccharide gel acts as the deposition point of Cd2+, directing and stabilising both the growth of the inorganic CdS phase and the expanded high surface area polysaccharide form.  Introduction Semiconductor quantum dots (QD) are of interest not only as an academic curiosity but also because these nanoparticles show potential as biological labels, photocatalysts, and nanoelectronic devices [1-3]. QDs offer a wide range of properties accessible via manipulation of size, chemistry, band gap and photoluminescent properties [4]. In this context, the fabrication of nano inorganic-organic hybrid materials is of particular interest, as the resulting materials may potentially possess the combined characteristics of the two original components [5]. Cadmium-based QDs (e.g. cadmium sulfide (CdS)) are considered attractive for the aforementioned applications due to their bright emission in the visible and near infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum [6]. However, these semiconductor QDs have a number of application problems associated with the unsuitability of the capping agents employed (e.g. in a biological environment), the retention of particles over a certain size, magnification (e.g. in cells), or degradation/decomposition of these inorganic QD materials. To circumvent these problems a variety of synthetic strategies have been employed to stabilise such QDs [7]. One promising approach is to employ materials (e.g. polymers) that provide coordination sites for Cd2+ and in turn stabilise the forming QD phase (e.g. CdS) during synthesis [8]. Therefore, the use of natural polysaccharides seems appropriate as these sugar polymers are relatively inexpensive and can provide functionality, biocompatibility, abundance and nontoxicity [9]. The preparation of QDs enclosed within the porous structure of a biocompatible polymer would offer a route to suitably capped or protected materials for biomedical applications (e.g. imaging) [8]. The advantages of both the QDs and polymeric support could then be combined when the active component (e.g. the QD) is dispersed and stabilised within a biocompatible, inexpensive and potentially highly porous, network [8,10]. In this context aqueous phase or "wet" colloidal chemistry approaches to the synthesis of nanomaterials can take inspiration from bio-mineralisation; that is the growth of inorganic crystals within the confines of biological systems - with the use of porous polysaccharide-derived materials seemingly a perfect match for the aforementioned criteria. The inspiration for this work comes from our and others previous reports on porous polysaccharide-supported metallic nanoparticles, and also from a number of literature reports detailing the synthesis of (non-porous) saccharide-capped CdS nanoparticles [8-12]. Previously, a wide variety of metallic nanoparticles (e.g. Pd, Au, Ag, etc.) have been protected using polysaccharides (e.g. starch, amylose, cellulose), finding application predominantly in absorption and catalysis [11]. Polysaccharides (and saccharides) have previously been employed to stabilise QDs (including CdS) [12], but significantly there have thus far been no reports that describe the use of porous polysaccharides (e.g. mesoporous starch) in the preparation of high surface area, (meso)porous QDs/polysaccharide hybrids. The polysaccharides, and indeed mesoporous forms of these biopolymers, would seem ideal vehicles to contain the growth of QDs to suitable sizes whilst at the same time providing in principle a biologically compatible transport media. Here, the synthesis of high surface area, CdS/mesoporous starch (MS) hybrids are presented, where the unique environment of a starch gel is utilised to confine the growth of the CdS phase. The presented materials have been characterised using X-ray diffraction, N2 sorption, transmission electron microscopy and diffuse reflectance ultraviolet-visible light spectroscopy. The CdS/MS materials, prepared at increasing CdS/starch (w/w) ratios, are synthesised in a straightforward manner based on green chemistry principles [13], demonstrating the straightforward, utile and transferable nature of the presented approach. 