The Cassini Enceladus encounters 2005-2010 in the view of energetic electron measurements  Highlights ► Ramp-like features in electron intensities in the low-energy channels. ► High-energy depletions upstream for electrons with energies above the resonant energy. ► "Dust"-related peaks in the electron data correlated with data from other instrument onboard Cassini. Abstract The moon Enceladus, embedded in Saturn's radiation belts, is the main internal source of neutral and charged particles in the Kronian magnetosphere. A plume of water ice molecules and dust released through geysers on the south polar region provides enough material to feed the E-ring and also the neutral torus of Saturn and the entire magnetosphere. In the time period 2005-2010 the Cassini spacecraft flew close by the moon 14 times, sometimes as low as 25km above the surface and directly through the plume. For the very first time measurements of plasma and energetic particles inside the plume and its immediate vicinity could be obtained. In this work we summarize the results of energetic electron measurements in the energy range 27keV to 21MeV taken by the Low Energy Magnetospheric Measurement System (LEMMS), part of the Magnetospheric Imaging Instrument (MIMI) onboard Cassini in the vicinity of the moon in combination with measurements of the magnetometer instrument MAG and the Electron Spectrometer ELS of the plasma instrument CAPS onboard the spacecraft. Features in the data can be interpreted as that the spacecraft was connected to the plume material along field lines well before entering the high density region of the plume. Sharp absorption signatures as the result of losses of energetic electrons bouncing along those field lines, through the emitted gas and dust clouds, clearly depend on flyby geometry as well as on measured pitch angle/look direction of the instrument. We found that the depletion signatures during some of the flybys show "ramp-like" features where only a partial depletion has been observed further away from the moon followed by nearly full absorption of electrons closer in. We interpret this as partially/fully connected to the flux tube connecting the moon with Cassini. During at least two of the flybys (with some evidence of one additional encounter) MIMI/LEMMS data are consistent with the presence of dust in energetic electron data when Cassini flew directly through the south polar plume. In addition we found gradients in the magnetic field components which are frequently found to be associated with changes in the MIMI/LEMMS particles intensities. This indicates that complex electron drifts in the vicinity of Enceladus could form forbidden regions for electrons which may appear as intensity drop-outs.  Introduction Enceladus, one out of currently 62 satellites of Saturn, orbits the planet at a distance of 3.95 Saturn radii RS (1RS=60,268km) and is embedded in the radiation belts of Saturn's inner magnetosphere. Even with a small radius REnc of only 252km and an apparent similarity to other icy moons, this moon is by far the most important internal source of dust, neutral gas and plasma in the saturnian system and especially in the magnetosphere. As already inferred from data of the first flybys of the Pioneer 11 (1979), Voyager 1 (1980) and Voyager 2 (1981) spacecraft, respectively (Smith et al., 1981; Krimigis et al., 1982), this moon plays the same role Io does for the jovian system. The Cassini spacecraft, in orbit around Saturn since July 2004, has flown by Enceladus 14 times between 2005 and 2010. Data from Cassini instrument teams identified a plume of water geysers above the so called "tigerstripes" on the south pole of the moon (Dougherty et al., 2006; Porco et al., 2006). This discovery is one of the most important findings to better understand the saturnian magnetosphere. The material released in the form of water gas, ice molecules and dust (Waite et al., 2006; Spahn et al., 2006) from those geysers is the main source of the E-ring and the neutral torus and is the major plasma source of water group ions in the magnetosphere. A summary of Enceladus findings from Cassini measurements is very well presented by Spencer et al. (2009). The interaction between energetic electrons and the moon essentially is given by the individual motion of the particles. Energetic charged particles bounce along the magnetic field lines between the north and south pole of Saturn and drift azimuthally at the same time. A moon or any other object (ring material or ring arcs, plume material, neutral gas, dust, etc.) blocks and absorbs some of those bouncing particles, appearing as an absorption signature in the differential intensities of the measured particles in a given energy range. The gaps in the distribution due to those losses are categorized as macrosignatures and microsignatures (Selesnick, 1993). While the macrosignatures are seen at all local times and latitudes the microsignatures are highly dependent on the longitudinal distance between the observer (spacecraft) and the absorbing body (for a mathematical description see van Allen et al. (1980), Thomsen and van Allen (1980) and also Roussos et al. (2007)). Particles are lost in that region of the magnetosphere when encountering the moon but refilled in time by particle sources or diffusion processes. The depths of the absorption signature in the particle intensities can be used to determine the amount of material causing the loss of energetic particles as a function of longitudinal distance with respect to Enceladus if the loss processes are known and one of them involves interaction with gas or dust. In addition to the bounce motion up and down along the field lines the charged particles magnetically drift perpendicular to the B→×∇B→ direction. Since both B→ and ∇B→ are disturbed around Enceladus, the electron motion will also be disturbed, modifying to some extent the flux distribution in the moon's vicinity. Therefore, particle fluxes may reflect integrated effects of the disturbed field environment around a moon, seen in the particles that drift across it. Ions and electrons drift in opposite directions around the planet. Cassini data analysis provided the opportunity to confirm earlier findings from previous missions. Effects in the local particle distributions have been studied in the literature. Paranicas et al. (2005) studied the first encounter E0 of the Cassini spacecraft with Enceladus. The authors made it clear that upstream of the moon it is only expected to measure an absorption signature of MeV electrons. Nothing should be seen in energy channels below the "resonance" energy (Thomsen and van Allen, 1980). The presence of microsignatures in MeV electrons upstream of the moon therefore are a strong indicator of a fresh absorption caused by the moon itself. Jones et al. (2006) investigated the effect of the plume on energetic particles in the magnetosphere and analyzed the response of charged particle measurements from the Low Energy Magnetospheric Measurement System (LEMMS) onboard Cassini. Khurana et al. (2007) studied the magnetic measurements from the flybys E0-E2 in terms of mass-loading while Tokar et al. (2009) found in CAPS plasma data freshly-produced water-group ions and heavier water dimer ions HxO2+ during encounters E3 and E5. Kempf et al. (2008) studied the dust particles in the E-ring close to Enceladus and found its vertical distribution to be 4300km or 17 REnc thick. Jones et al. (2009) found that negatively and positively charged particles of nanometer scales are released through the vents in the south polar region. Farrell et al. (2009) reported electron density dropouts near Enceladus during flyby E3 most probably caused by absorption by sub-millimeter size water ice grains in the plume. Coates et al. (2010) reported negative ions in plume measurements of the Electron Spectrometer CAPS/ELS and Teolis et al. (2010) investigated the density and structure of Enceladus' south polar plume during E3 and E5 by using data of the Cassini ion neutral mass spectrometer INMS and indicated that 100kg of plume water vapor escapes every second and spreads out uniformly. In addition they detected fine-grained ice concentrated in the jets of the multiple local sources along the tigerstripes. Farrell et al. (2010) studied the modified plasma of Saturn's magnetosphere in the vicinity of Enceladus. They pointed out that a cloud of dust exists around the moon extending at least 20 REnc both north and south of the equator, while Shafiq et al. (2011) reported dusty plasma measurements during encounter E3. Besides the data analysis theoretical work, analytic modelling, and especially numerical simulations have been performed recently (Jia et al., 2010b,; Tenishev et al., 2010; Cassidy and Johnson, 2010; Kriegel et al., 2009; Omidi et al., 2010; Simon et al., 2011). In those studies the environment of Enceladus has been simulated and parameters like the local gas distribution, the importance of dust near the moon and the implications for the magnetosphere have been determined. Tseng and Ip (2011) predicted Enceladus to be an important source of Saturn's ring atmosphere and ionosphere theoretically, and suggested additional plasma and particle data to compare with their predictions. Recently evidence of an Enceladus footprint in Saturn's auroral zone has been reported by Pryor et al. (2011). Cravens et al. (2011) studied the Enceladus torus theoretically based on CAPS measurements and found two populations: a denser part near 4 REnc and a less dense and more radially extended part. Finally Hartogh et al. (2011) inferred that the activity on Enceladus is even likely the source of water in the upper atmosphere of Saturn, underlining the importance of that moon for the saturnian system as a whole. All these investigations show the importance of Enceladus studies to better explain the source- and transport processes in Saturn's magnetosphere. In this paper we present an overview of energetic electron measurements (27keV to 21MeV) obtained by the Low Energy Magnetospheric Measurement System (LEMMS) onboard the Cassini spacecraft during the first 14 close encounters with Enceladus (E0-E13) between 2005 and 2010. 