Short-term metabolic and growth responses of the cold-water coral Lophelia pertusa to ocean acidification  Abstract Cold-water corals are associated with high local biodiversity, but despite their importance as ecosystem engineers, little is known about how these organisms will respond to projected ocean acidification. Since preindustrial times, average ocean pH has decreased from 8.2 to ~8.1, and predicted CO2 emissions will decrease by up to another 0.3 pH units by the end of the century. This decrease in pH may have a wide range of impacts upon marine life, and in particular upon calcifiers such as cold-water corals. Lophelia pertusa is the most widespread cold-water coral (CWC) species, frequently found in the North Atlantic. Here, we present the first short-term (21 days) data on the effects of increased CO2 (750ppm) upon the metabolism of freshly collected L. pertusa from Mingulay Reef Complex, Scotland, for comparison with net calcification. Over 21 days, corals exposed to increased CO2 conditions had significantly lower respiration rates (11.4±1.39 SE, µmolO2g-1tissuedryweighth-1) than corals in control conditions (28.6±7.30 SE µmolO2g-1tissuedryweighth-1). There was no corresponding change in calcification rates between treatments, measured using the alkalinity anomaly technique and 14C uptake. The decrease in respiration rate and maintenance of calcification rate indicates an energetic imbalance, likely facilitated by utilisation of lipid reserves. These data from freshly collected L. pertusa from the Mingulay Reef Complex will help define the impact of ocean acidification upon the growth, physiology and structural integrity of this key reef framework forming species.  Introduction Cold-water corals are among the most three-dimensionally complex deep-sea habitats known and are associated with high local biodiversity (Roberts et al., 2006, 2009). However, their remoteness and the relatively short history of ecological research in these habitats mean that to date, we have little information on how these ecosystems will fare in the face of predicted future climate change. Similar to their tropical counterparts, cold-water corals (referred to as CWC herein) are under potential threat from increasing sea temperatures and ocean acidification. Ocean acidification, also referred to as the 'other CO2 problem' or the 'evil twin of global warming', is caused by CO2 dissolving into the oceans. As atmospheric CO2 levels increase, more CO2 dissolves into the oceans and forms carbonic acid, which dissociates to form hydrogen and bicarbonate ions. This process has led to a decrease in pH by 0.1 units since the industrial revolution, and increasing amounts of atmospheric CO2 are projected to further decrease ocean pH by another 0.3-0.4 pH units by the end of the century in addition to altering seawater carbonate chemistry (Caldeira and Wickett, 2003; Guinotte et al., 2006; Kleypas et al., 1999; Orr et al., 2005). The shift in carbonate chemistry associated with ocean acidification also reduces the saturation state of aragonite, which is a naturally occurring polymorph of calcium carbonate from which most framework-building corals build their skeletons. The aragonite saturation depth or 'horizon' (ASH) (Guinotte et al., 2006) is predicted to become shallower (shoal), making it more difficult for calcifying organisms near this depth to maintain their calcified structures, thus affecting net reef growth. CWC are under particular threat as they inhabit a much larger bathymetric range than tropical corals, and as such are closer to the ASH (Fautin et al., 2009; Form and Riebesell, 2012; Guinotte et al., 2006; Kleypas, 2006; McCulloch et al., 2012a; Roberts et al., 2006; Thresher et al., 2011; Turley et al., 2007). Only 5% of CWC are found below the ASH at present (Form and Riebesell, 2012), as net calcification below the ASH would require considerable energetic input at the detriment of other energetic processes. Shoaling of the horizon could thus have potentially severe consequences for CWC. To date, only a handful of studies have been conducted on the responses of Lophelia pertusa to ocean acidification. These focus on growth rate, ranging from very short term 24 hour experiments (Maier et al., 2009) on freshly collected coral, to longer-term 6 month (Form and Riebesell, 2012) experiments on laboratory-kept specimens. Ocean acidification has very varied effects on the growth of calcifying organisms, with different phyla, and even species within phyla showing highly variable responses in experimental studies to date (Ries et al., 2009; Wicks and Roberts, 2012). For scleractinian corals (i.e. calcareous skeleton forming corals), many studies demonstrate a reduction in growth (net calcification rates) in response to ocean acidification (Gattuso et al., 1998; Kleypas and Langdon, 2006; Krief et al., 2010; Langdon and Atkinson, 2005; Marubini et al., 2003). However, corals can actively increase the pH in the organic matrix where calcification occurs. Thus even in situations where the surrounding water is undersaturated with respect to aragonite, calcification can still occur (McCulloch et al., 2012a, 2012b). The process of increasing pH at calcification sites within corals is driven by Ca2+ATPase, which pumps Ca2+ ions into the sub-calicoblastic space in exchange for H+ ions (Allemand et al., 2004; Cohen and McConnaughey, 2003; Mass et al., 2012). However, this process is energy intensive and thus may require increased food intake (Edmunds, 2011). The low abundance of CWC below the ASH suggests that increased energetic demands cannot usually be met, and that dissolution of exposed skeletal framework may be greater that net calcification by tissue-covered skeleton. To fully understand the impact of increased CO2 on live CWC, it is important to combine growth rates with measures of metabolism, which has not been done previously. The research presented here addressed the question of whether ocean acidification will impact upon the metabolism and net calcification rate of the CWC Lophelia pertusa in a short-term experiment. To this end, respiration and net calcification rates were calculated in corals exposed to increased CO2 conditions every 7 days for a total period of 21 days. 