Episodic bright and dark spots on Uranus  Highlights ► A spot of high and increasing brightness was discovered on Uranus on 26 October 2011. ► This 24°N spot was found about 500 mb above the 1.2bar methane condensation level. ► A second and 500mb deeper brightspot was discovered just 2°N of the first. ► Their different drift rates measured from July to Dec led to many close approaches. ► Hubble imaging revealed a rare dark spot near their 25 December 2011 close approach. Abstract The northern mid-latitudes of Uranus produce greater episodes of bright cloud formation than any other region on the planet. Near 30°N, very bright cloud features were observed in 1999, 2004, and 2005, with lifetimes of the order of months. In October 2011, Gemini and HST observations revealed another unusually bright cloud feature near 23°N, which was subsequently identified in July 2011 observations and found to be increasing in brightness. Observations obtained at Keck in November 2011 revealed a second bright spot only 2°N of the first, but with a substantially different drift rate (-9.2°E/day vs -1.4°E/day), which we later determined would lead to a close approach on 25 December 2011. A Hubble Target of Opportunity proposal was activated to image the results of the interaction. We found that the original bright spot had faded dramatically before the HST observations had begun and the second bright spot was found to be a companion of a new dark spot on Uranus, only the second ever observed. Both spots exhibited variable drift rates during the nearly 5months of tracking, and both varied in brightness, with BS1 reaching its observed peak on 26 October 2011, and BS2 on 11 November 2011. Altitude measurements based on near-IR imaging in H and Hcont filters showed that the deeper BS2 clouds were located near the methane condensation level (≈1.2bars), while BS1 was generally ∼500mb above that level (at lower pressures). Large morphological changes in the bright cloud features suggest that they are companion clouds of possibly orographic nature associated with vortex circulations, perhaps similar to companion clouds associated with the Great Dark Spot on Neptune, but in this case at a much smaller size scale, spanning only a few degrees of longitude at their greatest extents.  Introduction As the northern mid-latitudes of Uranus emerged from a long dark winter in the late 1990s, bright cloud features began to appear in near-IR images, unlike any that had been seen in the southern hemisphere. In 1997, using the recently commissioned HST NICMOS camera, Karkoschka (1998) found several bright clouds near the northern limb of Uranus. The local contrast of these features reached a maximum near 190% at 1.7μm, and the fractional integrated differential brightness (FIDB), which is the total extra light reflected by one of these clouds as a fraction of the total light reflected by the planet, reached about 1.2%. This was followed by the Sromovsky et al. (2000) detection of even brighter cloud features in 1998 and 1999 groundbased images obtained with the NASA IRTF NSFCAM imager. One of these features, located at a latitude of 30°±6°N, reached a local contrast of ∼500% (in deconvolved images) and an FIDB of 4.9±0.7% using the Spencer 1.73-μm filter. The brightest single cloud feature ever observed on Uranus was found 6years later by Sromovsky et al. (2007) in 14-15 August 2005 Keck II images obtained with the NIRC2 camera and adaptive optics system. This feature (the brightest feature in Fig. 1B) reached an FIDB value of 4-5% in the H filter and ∼13% in the K′ filter. The high brightness was short lived, however. In images taken on 6 July (before the peak) and on 29 October (more than two months later) the feature was a factor of 4-10times dimmer. Another especially interesting transient feature was found at nearly the same latitude in 2004 images (Sromovsky and Fry, 2005), but in this case the bright clouds formed a huge complex extending across almost 90° of longitude (Fig. 1A). These transient but very bright cloud features in the northern hemisphere of Uranus were seen in both H and K′ filters, the latter implying that the features were elevated to relatively high altitudes, placing significant amounts of aerosol scattering above the background of methane and hydrogen absorption. These features reached pressures in the 300-500mb range (Sromovsky et al., 2007), which is well above the 1.2-bar methane condensation level (Sromovsky et al., 2011). These eruptions of bright cloud material are thus almost certainly composed largely of methane ice, perhaps as pure particles or as methane ice coatings on particles originally condensed at deeper levels and then lofted above the methane condensation level. These bright cloud features might possibly be due to deep convective events, qualitatively similar to thunderstorms on Jupiter. A more likely explanation, however, is that such features are generated by vertical displacements of atmosphere flowing around vortex circulations, resulting in local condensation as the flow is displaced above the methane condensation level. Bright cloud features associated with Neptune's Great Dark Spot were termed companion clouds because they traveled along with it in defiance of the meridional shear of the local zonal wind profile (Hammel et al. (1989)). Such clouds are thought to be similar to orographic clouds generated by lee waves downwind of mountain ranges, an idea first suggested by Smith et al., 1989 and later verified by dynamical models in which vortex circulations produced similar cloud features (Stratman et al., 2001). Companion clouds were also found to be associated with the first dark spot ever seen on Uranus (Hammel et al., 2009), which was also found at northern mid-latitudes in July 2006. The dark spot itself was near 28°N planetocentric latitude, while bright companion clouds were seen over a latitude range of 3° centered about 29°N. Companion clouds related to this dark spot were also seen in H images obtained with the Keck II telescope NIRC2 Narrow Angle (NA) camera (Fig. 1C), though they were not unusually bright in these images. A similar configuration of even brighter clouds was observed in 2007 (Fig. 1D), also thought to be associated with a dark oval circulation feature (Sromovsky et al., 2009), although the evidence is not as strong in this case. The cause of these sudden increases in high altitude cloud development is unknown, and whether they are all related to vortex circulation features is likewise unknown. Thus, further examples that can be studied in detail offer the possibility of gaining a better understanding of this phenomenon. On 26 October 2011, Gemini images of Uranus revealed another unusually bright cloud feature (Fig. 2C), providing us with another possible opportunity to study this episodic development. We also located these features in a set of Hubble images taken to support an investigation of the planet's rings (M. Showalter, PI) on 13 October and 23 October 2011 using the F845M filter. These images (Fig. 2A and B) revealed that the cloud feature had brightened and impelled us to further investigation. In the following, we describe the observations obtained in pursuit of this feature, the motions we determined from them, the morphological changes that occurred, the nature of a second bright spot discovered at nearly the same latitude, the predicted close approach of the two features, their brightness changes over time, the Target of Opportunity imaging results, constraints on their vertical structure, and our conclusions. 