Flow level detection and filtering of low-rate DDoS  Abstract The recently proposed TCP-targeted Low-rate Distributed Denial-of-Service (LDDoS) attacks send fewer packets to attack legitimate flows by exploiting the vulnerability in TCP's congestion control mechanism. They are difficult to detect while causing severe damage to TCP-based applications. Existing approaches can only detect the presence of an LDDoS attack, but fail to identify LDDoS flows. In this paper, we propose a novel metric - Congestion Participation Rate (CPR) - and a CPR-based approach to detect and filter LDDoS attacks by their intention to congest the network. The major innovation of the CPR-base approach is its ability to identify LDDoS flows. A flow with a CPR higher than a predefined threshold is classified as an LDDoS flow, and consequently all of its packets will be dropped. We analyze the effectiveness of CPR theoretically by quantifying the average CPR difference between normal TCP flows and LDDoS flows and showing that CPR can differentiate them. We conduct ns-2 simulations, test-bed experiments, and Internet traffic trace analysis to validate our analytical results and evaluate the performance of the proposed approach. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed CPR-based approach is substantially more effective compared to an existing Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT)-based approach - one of the most efficient approaches in detecting LDDoS attacks. We also provide experimental guidance to choose the CPR threshold in practice.  Introduction Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks [1] have been identified as a major threat to today's Internet services. Being a new kind of DDoS attacks, TCP-targeted Low-rate Distributed Denial-of-Service (LDDoS) [2] attacks are more efficient in terms of causing damage to legitimate flows and more difficult to detect when compared to traditional flooding-based DDoS attacks. Traditional flooding-based DDoS attacks employ a "sledge-hammer" approach of high-rate transmission of packets, which obviously distinguishes themselves from normal data flows in statistical characteristics. Many of the proposed approaches for detecting DDoS attacks have been based on these statistical characteristics [3-7]. LDDoS attacks are quite different from the traditional flooding-based DDoS attacks as they exploit the vulnerabilities in TCP's congestion control mechanism. Instead of sending continuous network traffic, an LDDoS attacker sends periodically pulsing data flows, which may dramatically reduce the average rate of attack flows. LDDoS attacks have already been observed in the Internet2 Abilene backbone [8], thus presenting a new challenge to the security of the Internet. When facing large scale LDDoS attacks, existing defense approaches can only detect the presence of the LDDoS attack, but cannot determine whether a particular flow is an attack flow or not. In this paper we propose a novel metric "Congestion Participation Rate" (CPR) to identify LDDoS flows. The CPR-based approach exploits the fact that LDDoS flows actively induce network congestion whereas normal TCP flows actively avoid network congestion. That is, normal TCP flows will tend to send fewer packets during network congestion whereas LDDoS flows would not. The Congestion Participation Rate (CPR) can accurately capture this fundamental difference, and hence allow us to identify LDDoS flows. 