Numerical model of swash motion and air entrapment within coarse-grained beaches  Abstract The paper presents a numerical model for bore-driven swash on permeable coarse-grained beaches. The surface flow module is modelled using the non-linear shallow water equations (NLSWEs), solved using the Godunov-based finite volume ADER scheme, which is suitable for handling steep bores as well as large source terms in the NLSWEs. The subsurface flow comprises: (i) infiltration and exfiltration modelled as vertical piston-like flow, (ii) horizontal pore-air movement within the unsaturated region of the beach, (iii) the horizontal groundwater flow. Model predictions of the surface and subsurface flow are in good agreement with measurements from large-scale laboratory experiments for swash on permeable, immobile beaches. In these simulations air velocity was sufficiently small to justify using Darcy's resistance law for the air flow, whereas the quadratic Forchheimer law had to be used for the infiltration and groundwater flow. The validated numerical model provides insight into the surface-subsurface water exchange for bore-driven swash on coarse-grained beaches. The impact of air entrapped between the wetting front and the groundwater level on the water exchange is examined in particular. Highlights ► We model key mechanisms of the water exchange between swash and subsurface. ► Focus is on filtration and pore-air pressure build-up within the unsaturated beach. ► Validation is carried out with measurements from large-scale laboratory experiments. ► Swash model is consistent with experimental results on two coarse-grained beaches. ► The insights contribute to better understanding and modelling of key swash processes.  Introduction Bore-driven swash on unsaturated coarse-grained beaches generates several interacting physical processes: surface flow over the beach face, infiltration into the initially unsaturated part of the beach, air entrapment below the wetting front (Steenhauer et al., 2011a) and groundwater flow. Surface flow is commonly modelled using the Non-Linear Shallow Water Equations (NLSWEs); examples of such models are reviewed in Brocchini and Dodd (2008). Many swash models account for groundwater flow (Clarke et al., 2004; Lara et al., 2006; Van Gent, 1994; Wurjanto and Kobayashi, 1993), but few include simulation of water infiltration into the unsaturated part of the beach (Dodd et al., 2008; Packwood, 1983; Steenhauer et al., 2011b), and, to the authors' knowledge, none simulates air movement within the beach. However, the field investigations of Horn (2002, 2006) and a recent laboratory study by Steenhauer et al. (2011a) have shown that air entrapment can significantly impact on infiltration and exfiltration processes in natural beaches. This paper presents a numerical model of bore-driven swash, including subsurface flow, for coarse-grained beaches. The model accounts for all relevant physical processes, namely the surface flow, infiltration and exfiltration, pore-air movement and groundwater flow. Model predictions are compared with the detailed surface and subsurface flow measurements of Steenhauer et al. (2011a). The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the numerical model for bore-driven swash on permeable coarse-grained beaches, focussing in particular on the simulation of pore-air pressure and the groundwater behaviour. In Section 3 experimental results are compared to numerical results giving an assessment of the capability of the model formulations. The main conclusions are summarised in Section 4. 