Minor and trace element emissions from post-combustion CO2 capture from coal: Experimental and equilibrium calculations  Highlights • Tested pilot scale, 25kWth CO2 capture reactor, using Ca-based CO2 sorbent. • Flue gas trace element emission sampling based on EPA Method 29. • EDS analysis undertaken of Ca-based sorbent for elemental analysis. • Sensitivity analysis carried out on MTDATA software, for 9 and 21 trace elements. • Thermodynamic equilibrium modelling undertaken to support experimental work. Abstract Elemental partitioning, including gaseous elemental emissions from pilot scale (25kWth), post combustion CO2 capture using a Ca-based sorbent, have been investigated for naturally occurring elemental impurities found in limestone, that have the potential to be released to the environment under carbonation and calcination conditions. Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) analysis of Longcliffe SP52 limestone was undertaken to identify other impurities present, and the effect of sorbent mass and SO2 concentration on elemental partitioning in the carbonator between solid sorbent and gaseous phase was investigated, using a bubbler sampling system. Samples were analysed using ICP-MS, which showed that sorbent mass and SO2 concentration in the carbonator effected the concentrations of gaseous trace elements sampled. Thermodynamic modelling of the carbonation and calcination process was also undertaken, based on molar quantities of trace elements identified from ICP-MS analysis of limestone, which provided useful information with regards to element stability and partitioning under realistic CO2 capture conditions.  Introduction Calcium looping is a method of CO2 capture which utilises fluidised bed technology, whereby a particulate bed is fluidised using a gas within a reactor. In this case the particulate bed comprises a limestone-derived CO2 sorbent, and the fluidising gas comprises CO2-containing flue gas. The calcium looping cycle makes use of the reversible carbonation reaction, and the subsequent CO2 capture and release process is therefore cyclic. The equilibrium carbonation-calcination reaction is provided by Eq. (1), whereby carbonation is exothermic and calcination is endothermic. 