Potential transgenic routes to increase tree biomass  Highlights • Increasing forest biomass has significant economic and environmental impact. • Many forestry objectives, e.g., more biomass, are best attained by transgenesis. • Transgenes enable plants to display one or a few traits for biomass applications. • Multi-trait engineering can generate a superior tree expressing most desired traits. Abstract Biomass is a prime target for genetic engineering in forestry because increased biomass yield will benefit most downstream applications such as timber, fiber, pulp, paper, and bioenergy production. Transgenesis can increase biomass by improving resource acquisition and product utilization and by enhancing competitive ability for solar energy, water, and mineral nutrients. Transgenes that affect juvenility, winter dormancy, and flowering have been shown to influence biomass as well. Transgenic approaches have increased yield potential by mitigating the adverse effects of prevailing stress factors in the environment. Simultaneous introduction of multiple genes for resistance to various stress factors into trees may help forest trees cope with multiple or changing environments. We propose multi-trait engineering for tree crops, simultaneously deploying multiple independent genes to address a set of genetically uncorrelated traits that are important for crop improvement. This strategy increases the probability of unpredictable (synergistic or detrimental) interactions that may substantially affect the overall phenotype and its long-term performance. The very limited ability to predict the physiological processes that may be impacted by such a strategy requires vigilance and care during implementation. Hence, we recommend close monitoring of the resultant transgenic genotypes in multi-year, multi-location field trials.  Introduction Forests are rich sources of biodiversity and serve as sanctuaries to organisms under threat of extinction. They help reduce surface runoff and their roots stabilize the soil to impede erosion. Forests fix atmospheric CO2 into biomass and consequently mitigate climate change. Wood, the primary renewable resource from forests, is widely used for energy, pulp and paper-making, textiles, and construction. Forests also provide the raw materials for non-traditional products such as bioplastics, pharmaceuticals and chemical feed stocks. Forest trees can flourish with comparatively little human intervention. They are often relegated to marginal land that is considered unfit for general agriculture or horticulture. Such areas may feature combinations of steep slopes, degraded soils, limited water, and/or nutrients. Furthermore, there is pressure on forest resources due to growth in the human population and climate change. Many forests are harvested unsustainably and global forest area is decreasing [1]. Hence, it is important to examine how tree growth can be improved to satisfy the demand for forest products. Trees usually require several decades to reach harvest size, so there is considerable interest in fast-growing forest tree species or in ways to make trees grow faster. Other key objectives of tree improvement in modern forestry include improved wood quality, pest resistance, adaptation to environmental stress, and delayed flowering or ablated reproductive organs [2]. The long reproductive cycle of trees and their extensive requirements for space and resources impede progress in the production of superior trees through traditional breeding and selection. The intensification of environmental stressors (e.g., flooding, drought, extreme temperatures) associated with climate change complicate the problems faced by breeders. Genetic engineering complements conventional breeding programs by providing a means to rapidly incorporate foreign genes or to manipulate endogenous genes to improve stress resistance or biomass yield. Transgenic technology can improve elite genotypes chosen from current breeding programs. Transgenic approaches to precocious flowering [3] could enable tree crop breeders to use the power of inbreeding followed by selection to purify genomes of deleterious alleles within a reasonable period. Scientists have successfully manipulated various aspects of tree architecture, photosynthetic processes, and photosynthate assimilation to improve the quantity and quality of biomass. Increasing sink strength by accelerating downstream processes related to the utilization or storage of photosynthetic products have also significantly improved biomass yield. Delaying reproductive growth has significantly increased vegetative biomass in annuals and some reports indicate that this may be possible in trees as well [4,5]. Transgenic approaches have improved the ability of plants to survive or thrive even in the presence of various biotic and abiotic stress factors, many of which are likely to be aggravated by climate change. Some biotic factors, such as weed competition, affect trees only at the seedling/sapling stages, while others, like insect and pathogen infestations, can damage trees at any stage in their life cycle. Introduction of genes for resistance to abiotic stress such as low temperatures, osmotic extremes (salinity, drought) and heavy metal contamination, have expanded the range of potential sites for cultivation of fast-growing trees to these inhospitable environments. Most researchers have concentrated on the effects of single genes, but there are synergistically greater opportunities in pyramiding or "stacking" genes that combine superior phenotypes into an individual tree. We believe that the base of this transgenic pyramid must consist of genes proven to increase biomass, complemented by those designed to offset stress factors that suppress biomass yield. "Gene stacking" can be done sequentially in annual crop species, by intercrossing stable transgenic lines that over-express different genes. In trees, simultaneous introduction of many genes by multi-trait engineering, as we discuss in Section 9, would likely be a faster approach than crossing transgenic lines to endow trees with the various characteristics needed to thrive in the forest. This review focuses on transgenic research that has proven useful in substantially increasing tree biomass or protecting tree species from losing biomass due to stress. It is divided into sections that deal with transgenic research on crown and root architecture, reproduction, and various stress factors that affect biomass yield. We propose an approach to the creation of high-yielding transgenic trees resistant to multiple stress factors. Source and host species, gene identities and functions, as well as their effects on biomass and other traits are presented in tables throughout the manuscript. Findings validated with field-test data are highlighted in these tables with asterisks. Readers interested in transgenic approaches to major downstream applications of forest biomass (timber, pulp, biopolymers and bioenergy) may refer to recent reviews on these topics [6-9]. 