NaFe0.5Co0.5O2 as high energy and power positive electrode for Na-ion batteries  Abstract O3-type NaFeO2 is a promising candidate as positive electrode materials for rechargeable Na batteries. However, its reversible range of sodium extraction is relatively narrow (x=ca. 0.4 in Na1-xFeO2) because of the irreversible structural change, presumably associated with the iron migration into the adjacent tetrahedral sites in Na layers as we recently reported. Herein, we report that cobalt-substituted NaFeO2 demonstrates excellent electrode performance in a non-aqueous Na cell at room temperature. NaFe0.5Co0.5O2 delivers approximately 160mAhg-1 of reversible capacity with relatively good capacity retention and excellent rate-capability in a voltage range of 2.5-4.0V, resulting in reversible formation of Na0.3Fe0.5Co0.5O2. The partial substitution of metal element for Fe in O3-type NaFeO2-based materials is proved to be the important strategy to suppress the irreversible phase transition, and thus improving the reversibility of sodium removal/insertion as the electrode materials. Highlights • Synthesis and characterizations of layered NaFe0.5Co0.5O2. • Its electrode performance in Na cell was compared with those of NaFeO2 and NaCoO2. • NaxFe0.5Co0.5O2 is one of the highest power positive electrodes among layered oxides.  Introduction Research interests in rechargeable Na(-ion) batteries operable at room temperature are renewed as a promising system for large-scale energy storage devices in 2010s [1-3]. Layered NaxMeO2 (Me=metal(s)) materials have been intensively studied as electrode materials for the batteries. On the basis of the material abundance in the Earth's crust, layered (alpha-type) NaFeO2, of which layer structure is also classified as "O3-type" following the Delmas' notation [4], is of the most interest from a perspective on both gravimetric and volumetric specific capacity as positive electrode materials for the Na batteries. Indeed, as reported by Okada and coworkers, layered NaFeO2 is electrochemically active as Na intercalation host [5], whereas a lithium counterpart, layered LiFeO2, is known to be electrochemically inactive [6]. A Na//NaFeO2 cell shows a flat operating voltage profile at 3.3V vs. Na metal associated with Fe3+/Fe4+ redox [5]. Recently, we revisited the layered NaFeO2 system and a systematic study was conducted to examine the electrode performance by changing the cut-off voltage in Na cells [7]. When the cut-off voltage is limited to 3.4V in the sodium cells, NaFeO2 shows relatively good capacity retention with 80mAhg-1 of reversible capacity. The electrode reversibility is, however, significantly deteriorated by extending higher voltage above 3.5V. Ex-situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) study revealed an irreversible structure transition, presumably associated with partial migration of iron into adjacent and vacant tetrahedral sites created in Na layer by Na extraction, and thus the loss of Na conduction path. This result is also consistent with a recent publication of first principle calculation in a series of sodium layered oxides [8]. It has been suggested that the iron migration was energetically possible after the 50% of sodium extraction. In this paper, we report synthesis and remarkable electrode performance of highly-dense NaFe0.5Co0.5O2 powder, as O3-type NaFeO2-based positive electrode materials for the application of rechargeable Na-ion batteries. The finding shown in this article will further extend and accelerate the development of NaFeO2-based electrode materials for Na-ion batteries. We demonstrate that the iron migration in O3-NaFeO2 is effectively suppressed by metal substitution for iron, therefore, sodium insertion/extraction reversibility and capacity of O3-type NaFe0.5Co0.5O2 are surprisingly higher than those of NaCoO2 and NaFeO2 with enhanced capacity retention and rate capability. 