An investigation of plate-type windborne debris flight using coupled CFD-RBD models. Part II: Free and constrained flight  Abstract A coupled Computational Fluid Dynamics-Rigid Body Dynamics (CFD-RBD) model is presented, which is capable of modelling the 3D flight of plate-type windborne debris. The RBD model is based on rotational quaternions, which means that complex spinning modes of flight can be modelled accurately and robustly. For debris that is free to fly in the absence of obstructions, it is shown that, depending on the initial plate orientation, a number of distinct flight modes are observed. When the plate is aligned at right angles to the flow, the flight mode depends critically on the initial angle of attack. The plate may wobble or flutter as it flies, never completing a full rotation, or it may enter an autorotational flight mode. Depending on the direction of rotation, the plate is capable of flying faster than the wind. It does this by converting some of its potential energy into rotational energy. The rotation of the plate causes the forces acting on the plate to further accelerate or decelerate it, depending on the rotation direction. When the plate is not aligned at right angles to the flow, the plate always enters a complex 3D spinning mode, with significant crosswind motion, which is absent when the plate is aligned at right angles to the flow. This spinning mode is more typical of plates flying in real wind storms. In addition, using a porous region to represent a simple double-eaved building, plates are launched from the roof and their trajectory is simulated. The complex flow fields around the building result in more realistic plate trajectories. For this particular scenario, large suctions on the windward slope of the roof produce large amounts of lift in the plates released from that position, causing them to fly well above the building, never entering the wake of the building. Highlights ► We use CFD coupled to Rigid Body Dynamics to study the flight of windborne debris. ► Different modes of flight are identifiable, dependent on the initial orientation. ► Some debris flies faster than the wind as potential energy is converted to kinetic. ► Plates are shown launched from the roof of a typical building. ► The predicted flights compare well with limited experimental observations.  Introduction This paper is a companion to Part I (Kakimpa et al., in press), in which a robust, coupled CFD-RBD (Computational Fluid Dynamics-Rigid Body Dynamics) model is developed. The model is shown to be capable of predicting the unconstrained free flight of plate-type debris. The present paper takes that model and applies it to two cases. Firstly, the model has been used to investigate the influence of the plate's initial orientation, Tachikawa number, mass moment of inertia and geometric parameters, such as thickness-ratio and aspect-ratio, on the trajectory of the plate. This first case will be referred to as the "Free flight Simulations". Secondly, the model has been applied to debris that is launched from the building envelope and whose subsequent flight is influenced by the flow field in the locale of the building. This second case will be referred to as "complex launch conditions". The Introduction of Part I describes the rationale behind the need for better understanding of the flow processes that occur during the flight of wind borne debris. Here, we concern ourselves with a review of the literature appropriate to these complex launch conditions. Damage assessment reports of extreme windstorms in the UK, such as the Birmingham Tornado in 2005 (Marshall and Robinson, 2006) have revealed a definitive link between damage to downstream property and windborne debris generated from upstream structures. This pattern, illustrated in Fig. 1 is referred to as the debris damage chain (Minor and Beason, 1976; Holmes, 2010). With reference to the upwind building in Figs. 1 and 2 shows the sequence of roof failure. A large suction at the upwind eave of the gable roof produces partial lift-off of tiles. Lift off then continues as the wind gets under the roof, creating a positive pressure which assists the suction on the outside of the roof. Two possibilities then occur: the peeling off of tiles across the roof or the entire roof structure being blown off. Later, Lin et al. (2006) extended the early work by Holmes (2004) on compact debris to plate-type debris. Model experiments and full-scale tests on plates were conducted and the plate's mode of motion was observed, together with measurements of plate trajectory, and velocities, all of which are affected by the wind field, model characteristics, and initial support configuration. More significantly, however, further experimental studies have recently been performed, mainly focused on investigating the effects of atmospheric turbulence and complex launch conditions on debris flight. Visscher and Kopp (2007), Kordi et al. (2010) and Kordi and Kopp (2011) have recently undertaken pioneering experimental work involving a destructive wind tunnel modelling approach that more realistically represents the unsteady force coefficients on the plate which change dramatically as the panel lifts off of the roof, leaving a hole beneath. The experiments also included a simulated turbulent atmospheric boundary layer. This work has provided some insights into the influence of initial conditions (i.e. the fixing conditions and complex flow environment around the plate initially mounted on a roof) and flow turbulence to the mechanics of plate flight. Visscher and Kopp (2007) studied a 1:20 scale, aero-elastic "failure" model of a roof panel on a scaled house in a scaled, open country, turbulent boundary layer. The panel was held on the roof of the house with electromagnets which applied a restraining force. For similar initial conditions, Visscher and Kopp (2007) observed different modes of flight including translational, autorotational and intermediate modes. The translational mode was observed 75% of the time, while the autorotational mode was observed 25% of the time. Translational trajectories were found to have a short range with less scatter, resulting in less dispersion in the landing location, while autorotational trajectories were far more variable in landing location. An initial overturning failure was observed for every test although the results were noted to be dependent on hold down strength, panel mass and size as well as the angle of attack of the wind and the house geometry. Visscher and Kopp (2007) suggest that the effects of variability of the flow field on the resulting aero-dynamic normal forces play a critical role in determining the flight mode and this is probably most significant during the initial overturning and the first few moments thereafter. They conclude that the sensitivity to particular flight conditions appears to be greater even than indicated by Baker (2007) when actual panel failures are considered. Visscher and Kopp (2007) also found the speed at which sheathing panels fly to be a fraction of the mean wind speed and was calculated as 0.60 with standard deviation of 0.08 for the translational mode, and 0.70 with standard deviation of 0.12 for the autorotational mode for the particular panel, wind angle, roof location and hold-down force examined. Kordi et al. (2010) and then Kordi and Kopp (2011) applied the same failure model approach to investigate the effect of varying wind direction, debris properties and the surrounding neighbourhood structures. They observed that with oblique wind approach angles relative to the roof ridge, complex 3D spinning was the most dominant mode of flight and that the mode of flight was dependent on the approaching wind direction. Comparisons with the theoretical asymptotic limit from analytical models revealed conflicting results for different debris types with shingles flying close to the theoretical asymptotic limit speed while tiles did not. The present work is broken down into the aforementioned sections the first dealing with free flight, the second with complex launch conditions. 