Rhizosphere acid and alkaline phosphatase activity as a marker of P nutrition in nodulated Cyclopia and Aspalathus species in the Cape fynbos of South Africa  Abstract Cyclopia and Aspalathus species are important economic legumes in the Cape fynbos of South Africa, as they are used for making Honeybush and Rooibos tea, and for trade in the cut wild flower industry. The aim of this study was to assess acid and alkaline phosphatase activity in the rhizosphere of Cyclopia genistoides, Cyclopia subternata, Aspalathus caledonensis and Aspalathus aspalathoides as an indicator of P supply and P nutrition in the nutrient-poor soils of the Cape fynbos. Whether at Kokrivier or Kanetberg, the P enzyme activities were much higher in the rhizospheres of the legumes C. genistoides, C. subternata, A. caledonensis, and A. aspalathoides compared to those of the non-legumes Leucadendron strictum, Elegia thyrsoidea and Mimetes cucullatus, or bulk soil. As a result, plant-available P concentration in the rhizosphere, as well as shoot P levels closely mirrored acid and alkaline phosphatase activity in the rhizosphere of each plant species. Relative to younger plants, older Cyclopia species exhibited, much greater acid and alkaline phosphatase activity in the rhizosphere and this again resulted in much higher plant-available rhizosphere P. C. subternata plants developed from cuttings at Kanetberg showed greater rhizosphere acid and alkaline phosphatase activity than seedlings and bulk soil. As a result, the concentration of plant available-P and organic P were much higher in the rhizosphere of cuttings than seedlings, leading to greater shoot P in cuttings than seedlings. Taken together, these data suggest that rhizosphere P enzyme activity can be used as a good indicator of P supply and P nutrition in Cyclopia cuttings and seedlings, but less so in Aspalathus species in the Cape fynbos. The enhanced P nutrition in plants from cuttings probably accounts for the higher tea yields obtained by farmers when they use cuttings instead of seedlings in their plantations. Highlights • We measured acid and alkaline phosphatase activity in rhizosphere soils relative to bulk soils of fynbos legumes. • We concurrently measured P levels in rhizosphere and shoots. • We found significantly higher acid/alkaline phosphatase activity in rhizosphere soils relative to non-rhizosphere bulk soils. • Acid and alkaline activity increased with age of Cyclopia plants. • Plants developed from cuttings increased acid/alkaline phosphatase activity over seedlings.  Introduction Phosphorus is the second most important mineral nutrient for plant growth after N. Although total phosphate is abundant in many soils, it is largely unavailable for root uptake (Lambers et al., 2008), because, about 20-80% of soil P occurs in organic forms (Richardson et al., 2009). Soil P easily forms insoluble complexes with cations, and/or incorporated into organic matter by microbes (Tran et al., 2010; Vance et al., 2003). Even where P is applied as fertilizer, more than 80% becomes unavailable for plant uptake through adsorption, precipitation, or microbial immobilization (Holford, 1997; Mόzner et al., 2012). Thus crop yield on the 30-40% of the world's arable land is limited by P availability (Kochian et al., 2004; Lambers et al., 2006; Vance et al., 2003). In low P soils, both plants and microbes have developed various strategies for enhancing P supply. These include acidification of the rhizosphere, exudation of organic acids (Dakora and Phillips, 2002), and secretion of extracellular phosphatases (Kanu and Dakora, 2009, 2012; Kanu et al., 2007; Makoi et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2010). Acid phosphatases are enzymes of plant origin (Tarafdar et al., 2001), while alkaline phosphatases are secreted by bacteria, fungi and earthworms (Hebrien and Neal, 1990) and function catalytically above pΗ 7. These enzymes catalyze the cleavage of mineral P from organic phosphate esters, in acidic and alkaline soils that are low in P (Nannipieri et al., 2011), thus making P more available in these soils. Organic P from soil organic matter is therefore the main substrate for P supply by phosphatases in natural and agricultural ecosystems. Soils of the Cape fynbos are characterized by low organic matter, low pΗ (pH3-5), and low nutrient levels (Dakora, 2012), especially plant-available N (0.001-0.002% N, or 1 to 2mgNg-1soil) and P (0.00004 to 0.00037% P, or 0.4-3.7μgPg-1; Cramer, 2010). Furthermore, soils of the fynbos biome contain between 58-77% organic P and 2-88% inorganic P, which is Fe-bound and unavailable to plants (Straker, 1996). Despite these nutrient constraints, the fynbos is rich in many indigenous legume genera and species. For example, the genus Aspalathus consists of 281 species that are endemic to the Cape Floristic Region (Boatwright and Cupido, 2011), while Cyclopia has 24 species that uniquely occur only in the Cape fynbos (Du Toit et al., 1998). N limitation in legumes of the fynbos is overcome by high levels of N2 fixation. For example, Aspalathus linearis and Cyclopia species can contribute over 100kgNha-1 annually to the fynbos biome (Moufhe and Dakora, 1999; Spriggs and Dakora, 2008). However, little is known about P nutrition in fynbos legumes. Different mechanisms have been proposed for enhanced P supply and mineral uptake by fynbos species. Mycorrhizal infection of fynbos legumes has been suggested to enhance P supply by the symbiosis (Harrison, 1999), just as formation of cluster roots has been regarded as a way of increasing P nutrition in fynbos legumes (Kanu et al., 2013; Lambers and Shane, 2007; Lamont, 1982). We have, in fact, shown that cluster root formation by A. linearis in the Cape fynbos does not only improve P nutrition, but also increases the assimilation of other nutrients such as Ca, K, Mg, Na, Al, Fe, Mn, Zn and Cu (data not shown), clearly indicating that cluster root formation is a major mechanism for nutrient acquisition in the nutrient-poor fynbos. So far, little information exists on the mechanisms of P supply to native legumes of the fynbos. Yet some of them have economic importance. The 24 Cyclopia species, for example, are a source of Honeybush tea, a herbal beverage that is emerging as a major income earner that contributes about R12 million to the South African economy (DAFF, Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, 2012). Similarly, some of the 281 Aspalathus species and most Leucadendron species are exported as cut wild flowers (Criley, 2000; Reinten et al., 2011), while A. linearis produces Rooibos tea, another herbal beverage that contributes about R500 million to the South African economy (Joubert and de Beer, 2011; http://www.busrep.co.za). A. linearis is among the many species of the genus Aspalathus that is perceived to be suitable for phytoremediation (Kanu et al., 2013). There is therefore a need to understand the mechanisms underlying P supply to native species in a very low P environment. The aim of this study was to measure rhizosphere acid and alkaline phosphatase activity as an indicator of P supply and availability. This was achieved by measuring acid and alkaline phosphatase activity in bulk and rhizosphere soils and comparing that with P concentrations in both systems. Finally, a measure of increased P availability in the rhizosphere was used to track P levels in plant shoots. For comparison, non-legume plant species were sampled from each site as the legumes and included in this study. The test plant species used in this study are shown in Table 1, together with their collection sites, uses and nutrition-related biological traits. The data showed a relationship between acid and alkaline phosphatase in the rhizosphere and P availability in the rhizosphere, which was ultimately linked to P concentration in shoots. 