An assessment of a three-beam Doppler lidar wind profiling method for use in urban areas  Abstract Currently there are few observations of the urban wind field at heights other than rooftop level. Remote sensing instruments such as Doppler lidars provide wind speed data at many heights, which would be useful in determining wind loadings of tall buildings, and predicting local air quality. Studies comparing remote sensing with traditional anemometers carried out in flat, homogeneous terrain often use scan patterns which take several minutes. In an urban context the flow changes quickly in space and time, so faster scans are required to ensure little change in the flow over the scan period. We compare 3993h of wind speed data collected using a three-beam Doppler lidar wind profiling method with data from a sonic anemometer (190m). Both instruments are located in central London, UK; a highly built-up area. Based on wind profile measurements every 2min, the uncertainty in the hourly mean wind speed due to the sampling frequency is 0.05-0.11ms-1. The lidar tended to overestimate the wind speed by ≈0.5ms-1 for wind speeds below 20ms-1. Accuracy may be improved by increasing the scanning frequency of the lidar. This method is considered suitable for use in urban areas. Graphical abstract Highlights • There is a need for more wind speed data collected above rooftop level in cities. • Remote sensing instruments can measure throughout the boundary layer. • Rapid evolution of the flow above cities means a short scan time is needed. • Data using a 3-beam Doppler lidar profiling method was compared with an anemometer. • The 3-beam method was found to be suitable for use in urban areas.  Introduction Comprehensive knowledge of the urban wind field is important to a wide variety of applications, including air quality, micro-generation of electricity and building design. Dispersal of pollutants in urban areas is a well-studied area and data for this, and for studies of rooftop wind turbines, may be obtained using conventional instrumented masts, or roof-mounted equipment. It is often challenging to obtain wind profile data in urban areas as it is generally not possible to use radiosondes or tethered balloons within a city, and erecting masts at the height of many tall buildings is not feasible. The majority of studies of the urban boundary layer (UBL) have, therefore, been carried out using instrumented masts or roof-mounted instruments. This has led to a lack of observations at greater heights (Roth, 2000), a problem which may be solved if remote sensing instruments such as sodars and lidars can be successfully deployed in urban environments. Wind profile data, as opposed to the point measurements collected by traditional anemometers, are essential to the compilation of a complete urban wind climatology. Given the sometimes complex way in which wind profiles adjust to the urban surface, this information could be extremely useful for calculating potential wind loadings on tall buildings, as well as for producing accurate weather forecasts for urban areas. Another potential advantage of using remote sensing is that it is relatively simple to acquire data from above the roughness sublayer (RSL). Within the RSL the flow is directly influenced by roughness elements at the surface, such as trees and buildings, and may vary widely in the horizontal as well as the vertical. If we wish to obtain data that is representative of the wider surface, our measurements must be made above the RSL, which can be considered to extend up to 2-5 times the mean building height (Rotach, 1999; Cheng and Castro, 2002). This can be difficult to achieve using, for example, an anemometer, as this type of instrument is generally mounted on a mast or building, which are both likely to be within the RSL. There are several scan types that may be employed to obtain wind profiles using a Doppler lidar including Velocity Azimuth Display (Browning and Wexler, 1968), Range Height Indicator (Davies et al., 2003) and Doppler Beam Swinging (Pearson et al. 2009). A VAD scan involves making observations at a single elevation angle and many azimuth angles, so that the lidar beam describes a cone. An RHI scan takes samples at a single azimuth angle, and many elevations, so that the lidar samples a vertical 'slice' of the atmosphere. During a DBS scan the lidar measures vertically, and then tilted in at least two other perpendicular directions (e.g. north and east). Because a DBS scan involves scanning in fewer directions than an RHI or VAD scan, it can be completed more quickly (i.e. in seconds rather than minutes). These three scans can all be carried out using a single Doppler lidar, but two or more lidars may also be used to measure different components of the wind in a common volume (Collier et al., 2005), or to create a 'virtual tower' (Calhoun et al., 2006) using intersecting RHI scans for measuring wind profiles. Before deciding which scan type to use, it is necessary to consider the likely characteristics of the local wind field. Pearson et al. (2009) suggest that Doppler Beam Swinging (DBS) is suitable for areas where the flow cannot be considered to be uniform over the area sampled during a velocity azimuth display (VAD) scan, or steady over the time it takes for such a scan to be completed. The much shorter time required to complete a DBS scan should allow unsteady flow to be captured more completely because many scans may be completed in the same time required to carry out a VAD scan. Due to the extremely rough nature of the urban surface, high turbulence intensities may be found up to a substantial distance above the mean building height, suggesting that a DBS scan may be suitable for use in observing the urban wind field. This paper builds on the work of Pearson et al. (2009) by testing the DBS scanning method in an urban setting. As part of the ACTUAL project (Advanced Climate Technology Urban Atmospheric Laboratory) a pulsed Doppler lidar was located in central London, at a site on the Marylebone Road, with the aim of making observations throughout the UBL. Wind speed observations from the lidar using the DBS method were compared with data from a sonic anemometer located at 190m during the period 06/07/2010-11/01/2012. An estimate of the uncertainty of the lidar wind speeds was calculated and the suitability of the DBS method for urban wind profiling was assessed. 