The Ti/Al molar ratio as a new proxy for tracing sediment transportation processes and its application in aeolian events and sea level change in East Asia  Highlights • Ti/Al molar ratios of sediments declines during transportation. • Lake and pelagic sediments show relative low Ti/Al ratios. • The declined Ti/Al ratio in aerosol particles indicates Asian dust storm episode. • Ti/Al molar ratios of a deep marine core can estimate sea level changes. Abstract Ti/Al molar ratios of sediments in various sedimentary environments are used to explain sediment transportation from source regions to sink areas. Samples were collected from outcrops, soils, fluvial, lake, and marine sediment environments. Initial Ti/Al molar ratios of sediments are controlled by those of parent soils or rocks. These ratios tend to decline gradually as a result of heavy-mineral gravity fractionation during transportation. Sedimentary Ti/Al molar ratios in sink areas such as lakes and pelagic environments are lower than those in source regions. In this study, for the Changjiang River, Huanghe River, and Kaoping River, Ti/Al molar ratios decline considerably from downstream to estuary environments. Additionally, well sorted aeolian sands have extremely low Ti/Al molar ratios in northern China. The Ti/Al molar ratios of aerosol particles found in Taiwan and the East China Sea show reduced ratios as a result of Asia Dust Storm episodes. Furthermore, lower Ti/Al molar ratios in deep ocean sediments were discovered by tracing the distribution of sedimentary Ti/Al molar ratios in the South China Sea. When sea levels dropped during glacial periods, the river estuary was closer to deep marine areas and carried more terrestrial sediments into deep marine environments. The closer estuary with relatively higher Ti/Al ratio would lead increase of Ti/Al molar ratios in deep sea sediments. In this study, Ti/Al molar ratio is promoted as a new proxy to help with understanding changes in sedimentary environments.  Introduction Enhanced concentrations of terrigenous elements such as: Al, Si, Fe, K, and Ti have been interpreted as representing increased supply of siliciclastic materials of fluvial or aeolian origin in marine or lacustrine sediments (Goldberg and Arrhenius, 1958; Arz et al., 1998; Jansen et al., 1998; Chen et al., 2010, 2011). Al and Ti are considered extremely resistant to weathering and well conserved elements (Nesbitt and Markovics, 1997; Wei et al., 2003). Besides, they are generally used to estimate the abundance of terrigenous materials in sedimentary environments (Murray and Leinen, 1996; Klump et al., 2000). These two elements can resist chemical weathering processes (Nesbitt and Young, 1982; Nesbitt and Markovics, 1997); therefore, when considering transportation processes, the Ti/Al ratio is worth experimenting with to help trace density differences in siliciclastic materials derived from fluvial and aeolian sources. Among the terrigenous elements mentioned above Si, Fe, and K are not necessarily good indicators of sedimentary terrigenous origins. For example, Si content in marine or lacustrine sediments is often influenced by biogenic opal such as diatoms or radiolaria (Mackin and Aller, 1984). The element Fe may also reflect authigenic precipitation from Fe-Mn oxyhydroxides and pyrite under redox conditions (Mangini et al., 1990; Dymond et al., 1992). Finally, the element K in siliciclastic materials is mainly bonded to illite and potassium feldspar (Yarincik et al., 2000; Zabel et al., 2001), but it is also a major cation in seawater (Bruland, 1983). Moreover, K content declines during potassium feldspar alteration (Nesbitt and Young, 1982). Therefore, we suggest that Ti and Al can be used as efficient indicators of transportation energy changes by their different elementary gravity. This study examines whether Ti/Al molar ratio can help identify aeolian episodes in recent climate research, and also reconstruct sea level changes in a closed oceanic basin. To accomplish this research, extensive geological data has been obtained from field work in northern China (Inner Mongolia), Taiwan, and the marginal seas off China. In addition, relevant data from past research obtained from the Changjiang and Huanghe Rivers has also been consulted. Through these processes of carefully examining, interpreting, and demonstrating how Ti is distributed over East Asia as well as diagnosing the role of gravity fractionation of heavy minerals in the transportation process, we hope to show that the Ti/Al ratio can act as a proxy for tracing sedimentary transportation processes, especially in tracing aeolian events and sea level changes in East Asia. In paleoclimate research, variations in grain size are often used as an indicator of aeolian signals in the Loess Plateau (Pye and Zhou, 1989; Xiao et al., 1999; An, 2000), or the intensive coarse grain can be regarded as the flooding events in deposited environments. We should note that the grain size of deposits is susceptible to the influence of biogenic shells and organic matter. Therefore, complicated pretreatment processes need to be performed on dissolved biogenic shells and organic matter. This problem can be avoided by adopting the density differentiations of elements Ti and Al. 