Sets of lengths in maximal orders in central simple algebras  Abstract Let O be a holomorphy ring in a global field K, and R a classical maximal O-order in a central simple algebra over K. We study sets of lengths of factorizations of cancellative elements of R into atoms (irreducibles). In a large majority of cases there exists a transfer homomorphism to a monoid of zero-sum sequences over a ray class group of O, which implies that all the structural finiteness results for sets of lengths-valid for commutative Krull monoids with finite class group-hold also true for R. If O is the ring of algebraic integers of a number field K, we prove that in the remaining cases no such transfer homomorphism can exist and that several invariants dealing with sets of lengths are infinite.  Introduction Let H be a (left- and right-) cancellative semigroup and H× its group of units. An element u∈H∖H× is called irreducible (or an atom) if u=ab with a,b∈H implies that a∈H× or b∈H×. If a∈H∖H×, then l∈N is a length of a if there exist atoms u1,…,ul∈H with a=u1⋅⋯⋅ul, and the set of lengths of a, written as L(a), consists of all such lengths. If there is a non-unit a∈H with |L(a)|>1, say 1<k<l∈L(a), then for every n∈N, we have L(an)⊃{kn+ν(l-k)|ν∈[0,n]}, which shows that sets of lengths become arbitrarily large. If H is commutative and satisfies the ACC on divisorial ideals, then all sets of lengths are finite and non-empty. Sets of lengths (and all invariants derived from them, such as the set of distances) are among the most investigated invariants in factorization theory. So far research has almost been entirely devoted to the commutative setting, and it has focused on commutative noetherian domains, commutative Krull monoids, numerical monoids, and others (cf. [1,12,27,28,26,20,7]). Recall that a commutative noetherian domain is a Krull domain if and only if the monoid of non-zero elements is a Krull monoid and this is the case if and only if the domain is integrally closed. Suppose that H is a Krull monoid (so completely integrally closed and the ACC on divisorial two-sided ideals holds true). Then the monoid of divisorial two-sided ideals is a free abelian monoid. If H is commutative (or at least normalizing), this gives rise to the construction of a transfer homomorphism θ:H→B(GP), where B(GP) is the monoid of zero-sum sequences over a subset GP of the class group G of H. Transfer homomorphisms preserve sets of lengths, and if GP is finite, then B(GP) is a finitely generated commutative Krull monoid, whose sets of lengths can be studied with methods from combinatorial number theory. This approach has lead to a large variety of structural results for sets of lengths in commutative Krull monoids (see [27,24] for an overview). Only first hesitant steps were taken so far to study factorization properties in a non-commutative setting (for example, quaternion orders are investigated in [19,18,16]), semifirs in ([14,15], semigroup algebras in [37]). The present paper provides an in-depth study of sets of lengths in classical maximal orders over holomorphy rings in global fields. Let O be a commutative Krull domain with quotient field K, A a central simple algebra over K, R a maximal order in A, and R• the semigroup of cancellative elements (equivalently, R is a PI Krull ring). Any approach to study sets of lengths, which runs as described above and involves divisorial two-sided ideals, is restricted to normalizing Krull monoids [25, Theorem 4.13]. For this reason we develop the theory of divisorial one-sided ideals. In Section 3 we fix our terminology in the setting of cancellative small categories. Following ideas of Asano and Murata [5] and partly of Rehm [45,46], we provide in Section 4 a factorization theory of integral elements in arithmetical groupoids, and introduce an abstract transfer homomorphism for a subcategory of such a groupoid (Theorem 4.15). In Section 5 the divisorial one-sided ideal theory of maximal orders in quotient semigroups is given, and Proposition 5.16 establishes the relationship with arithmetical groupoids. Theorem 5.23 is a main result in the abstract setting of arithmetical maximal orders (Remarks 5.17.2 and 5.24.1 reveal how the well-known transfer homomorphisms for normalizing Krull monoids fit into our abstract theory). For maximal orders over commutative Krull domains, we see that all sets of lengths are finite and non-empty (Corollary 5.30). In Section 6 we demonstrate that classical maximal orders over holomorphy rings in global fields fulfill the abstract assumptions of Theorem 5.23, which implies the following structural finiteness results on sets of lengths. 