Experimental study of bore-driven swash hydrodynamics on impermeable rough slopes  Abstract A detailed experimental investigation of the hydrodynamics of large-scale, bore-driven swash on impermeable, rough beach slopes is described. The experiments were carried out on 1:10 impermeable, rough slopes with three different surface roughnesses based on 1.3mm sand, 5.4mm gravel and 8.4mm gravel. The large-scale discrete swash event was produced by the collapse of a dambreak-generated bore on the beach. Simultaneous depths and velocities were measured using LIF, Laser-induced fluorescence, and PIV, particle image velocimetry, respectively, yielding better resolution of the hydrodynamics than previous studies. Depth time-series, instantaneous velocity profiles, depth-averaged velocities, instantaneous turbulent kinetic energy profiles, depth-averaged turbulent kinetic energy, Reynolds stress profiles and bed shear stresses are presented for five cross-shore measurement locations in the swash. The measurements resolve the backwash shoreline position, and the late backwash period when depths are shallow and velocities are high. The detailed data can be used to test and develop advanced numerical models for bore-driven waves on rough slopes. Highlights ►Detailed hydrodynamics of bore-driven swash on impermeable, rough slopes. ►Large-scale laboratory experiments measuring simultaneous depths and velocities. ►Shows effects of slope roughness on bulk flow and turbulence properties. ►Yields measures of time-varying bed shear stress across the swash zone.  Introduction Swash on steep beaches is characterised by wave breaking followed by bore collapse on the beach slope. The flow velocities generated by bore collapse can be very high, up to 5m/s according to Hughes (1992), and the corresponding run-up on the beach can extend many metres. The swash zone is therefore a highly dynamic region of the beach, complicated in hydrodynamic terms because the flow is turbulent, highly unsteady and highly non-uniform, and in morphological terms because sediment fluxes are high and vary greatly across the swash zone. While many studies of swash carried out in the field have yielded useful insights (e.g. Austin and Masselink, 2006; Hughes, 1992; Masselink and Hughes, 1998; Puleo et al., 2000) fundamental aspects of swash are arguably best studied in controlled laboratory experiments because of the complexity of the processes at work. Table 1 lists previous laboratory studies which have investigated breaking wave and bore hydrodynamics in the swash zone, focused on the detailed hydrodynamics, the turbulence and, in some cases, the bed shear stress for smooth and rough impermeable beach slopes. The majority of the studies have been carried out in small-scale laboratory wave flumes. There are two disadvantages in using small wave flumes to study bore collapse on beaches. The first is that the relatively small scale leads to substantial scale effects in relation to roughness, permeability and sediment behaviour; the second is that the magnitudes of swash depths, velocities and maximum run-up are relatively small, making it more difficult to obtain accurate measurements of the key fundamental processes. An alternative method for generating a controlled swash event in the laboratory is to generate a large-scale bore through dam-break. A deep reservoir of water is separated from a shallow body of water by a partition that can be removed at high speed. After partition removal, the released water plunges and generates a bore travelling away from the reservoir. Subsequent bore collapse on a sloping beach located downstream results in a large-scale swash event with run-up that is an order of magnitude larger than swash run-up generated by waves on a sloping beach in a typical laboratory wave flume. The large scale of the swash means that scale effects are avoided and accurate measurements of the more detailed hydrodynamics are possible. This kind of set-up was used by Yeh (1991) and more recently by Barnes et al. (2009) and O'Donoghue et al. (2010). The dam-break swash experiment belongs to a larger family of dam-break experiments, which includes, for example, dam-break induced sediment transport on horizontal beds (e.g. Zech et al., 2008), 2D dam-break hydraulics (e.g. Aureli et al., 2008) and dam-break bore travel on a downward inclining slope (e.g. Chanson, 2004). The present paper reports new experiments designed to study the detailed hydrodynamics of large-scale bore-driven swash on impermeable, rough beach slopes. The experiments were carried out on three impermeable 1:10 slopes with different surface roughness in order to investigate the effect of roughness on the hydrodynamics. The experiments use a similar setup to that of O'Donoghue et al. (2010) but add substantially to the previous work by extending the range of beach roughness and by better resolution of the hydrodynamics through improved measurement methods, namely, the use of Laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) to better resolve flow depth and the use of an improved particle image velocimetry (PIV) system capable of measuring bed-normal as well as bed-parallel velocities. In addition, flow depth and velocity are measured simultaneously in the present study allowing a more thorough and rigorous analysis of the depth-averaged and ensemble-averaged velocities and the turbulence quantities. The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the experimental set-up and measurement methods and demonstrates the high repeatability and consistency of the measurements. Section 3 presents the experimental results: ensemble-averaged results for flow depth, shoreline position, depth-averaged velocity and velocity profiles are presented first, followed by results for turbulent kinetic energy and Reynolds stress; results for bed shear stress complete the section. The main conclusions of the study are presented in Section 4. 