Single deletions in mitochondrial DNA - Molecular mechanisms and disease phenotypes in clinical practice  Abstract Over 20years ago single clonal deletions were the first mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genetic defects described in association with human disease. Since then very large numbers of children and adults harbouring such deletions have been described and it is clear they are an important cause of human mitochondrial disease. However, there still remain many important challenges in relation to our understanding of mechanisms leading to deletion formation and propagation and in relation to the factors determining the complex and varying relationship between genotype and clinical phenotype. Although multidisciplinary team care is essential and can improve quality of life and outcomes for patients, a definitive molecular treatment for single mtDNA deletions remains an important translational research goal. Patients with mtDNA deletions exhibit a very wide range of different clinical phenotypes with marked variation in age at onset and disease severity. Single mtDNA deletions may enter into the differential diagnosis of many different paediatric and adult presentations across a wide range of medical specialties, although neurological presentations are amongst the most common. In this review, we examine the molecular mechanisms underpinning mtDNA replication and we consider the hypotheses proposed to explain the formation and propagation of single large-scale mtDNA deletions. We also describe the range of clinical features associated with single mtDNA deletions, outline a molecular diagnostic approach and discuss current management including the role of aerobic and resistance exercise training programmes.  Introduction Mitochondria are double membrane-bound intracellular organelles that form large branching reticular networks inside all eukaryotic cells except erythrocytes. Their primary function is to convert food substrates in the presence of oxygen to energy, in the form of ATP, by aerobic respiration. This oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) reaction is performed in the mitochondrial inner membrane by five enzyme complexes (so-called complexes I, II, III, IV and V). Electrons are provided by NADH and FADH2, which are reducing agents supplied by the oxidation of carbohydrates and fatty acids via the Krebs cycle and β-oxidation, respectively. Electrons are passed between a series of donors and increasingly electronegative acceptors until the final reduction of oxygen to water. Each step releases energy which is used to actively pump protons (via complex I, III and IV) from within the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space, thereby creating an electrochemical gradient (Δψm) across the inner mitochondrial membrane [1]. Some electrons leak directly to oxygen and form reactive oxygen species (ROS) and these molecules have long since been implicated in a number of disease states and ageing [2-4]. The proton gradient enables the terminal OXPHOS enzyme, complex V (ATP synthase), to generate ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate, by allowing protons to flow passively through it along the electrochemical gradient back into the mitochondrial matrix. Mitochondria are unique amongst intracellular organelles in that they contain their own DNA [5,6]. The mitochondrial genome is a double-stranded circular structure consisting of 16,659 base-pairs (bp). Genes are located on both strands; the so-called heavy (H) and light (L) strands due to their relative composition of either mainly purines (adenine and guanine) or pyrimidines (thymine and cytosine), respectively, with the former having greater molecular weight than the latter. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly compact with no introns and only one major non-coding region (NCR), known as the control region (consisting of ∼900bp in mammals), which contains the origin of replication for the H-strand (OH), the origins of transcription for both H- and L-strands and the Displacement loop (D-loop). The D-loop is a triple-stranded region whose third strand (or 7S DNA) spans approximately 650bp from nucleotide numbers 16,111 to 191 [7]. MtDNA codes for 37 genes which enable synthesis of 13 OXPHOS subunits required for aerobic respiration. The mtDNA is susceptible to oxidative DNA damage due to its close proximity to ROS at the inner mitochondrial membrane, lack of protective histone proteins, and limited mitochondrial DNA proof-reading and repair systems. As a result, mtDNA has a mutation rate 10-20 times that of nDNA [8,9]. In vivo, nuclear DNA (nDNA) adopts a condensed structure associated with histones and other proteins [10,11] called nucleosomes which form the basic repeating units of eukaryotic chromatin. These protein-DNA complexes compact, order, and protect the DNA, and create a degree of regulatory control to ensure its correct expression. They also facilitate co-ordinated copying and segregation of DNA molecules. MtDNA is also packaged as protein-DNA complexes called nucleoids, which may be the units of mtDNA transmission and inheritance [12,13]. Each mitochondrial nucleoid appears to contain a single mtDNA molecule. Nucleoids are associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane and are evenly spaced along the mitochondrial reticulum [14-17]. Interestingly, the nucleoid distribution process appears to be reliant on protein-protein interactions and is independent from the DNA itself [18]. More than 25 nucleoid-interacting proteins have been identified, but their precise role in mtDNA maintenance is not fully established. In fact, many of these proteins appear to have functions unrelated to mtDNA maintenance suggesting they are bifunctional [18]. Some are important for packaging, division and sorting of nucleoids, whereas others are involved in mtDNA replication, repair and transcription [17]. A detailed review of mitochondrial nucleoid-associated proteins and their function is given elsewhere [19]. Although the mtDNA encodes 13 essential OXPHOS subunits, all other proteins needed for mitochondrial OXPHOS function are encoded by nuclear genes. These include the remaining 77 OXPHOS subunits, and proteins involved with transcription and translation of mtDNA, assembly of the OXPHOS enzyme complexes, biosynthesis of mobile electron carriers in the inner mitochondrial membrane, import of solutes and proteins into the mitochondrion, regulation of mitochondrial membrane dynamics and composition, and mitochondrial fission and fusion. More than 80 nuclear genes have already been linked to human mitochondrial disease; however, an estimated 1500 nuclear-encoded proteins are targeted to mitochondria [20]. Defects in any of these genes could theoretically cause a mitochondrial disorder. Single large-scale deletions of mtDNA were the first mtDNA genetic defects to be described and associated with human mitochondrial disorders [21]. In 1988 Holt et al. identified a deleted mtDNA subpopulation in skeletal muscle but not blood in nine patients with mitochondrial myopathy. They found that the deleted population coexisted with wild-type (WT) mtDNA in muscle, a state known as heteroplasmy. It has subsequently been shown that such single deletions account for a quarter of all adult patients with mtDNA-related disease [22]; data consistent with the authors' own clinical practice (unpublished data). They are also an important cause of paediatric mtDNA-related mitochondrial disease. Single mtDNA deletions are considered sporadic events with low inheritance risk, whereas multiple mtDNA deletions are the result of primary nuclear defects in genes responsible for mtDNA maintenance or nucleoside metabolism and follow Mendelian inheritance patterns [23]. Here we review current understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying single large-scale mtDNA deletion formation. We will also consider the clinical phenotypes, diagnostic work-up and management of this subgroup of mitochondrial disorders. 