The effects of simultaneous root colonisation by three Glomus species on soil pore characteristics  Abstract The spatial and temporal nature of the precise interactions between soil fungi and roots and their subsequent role in developing soil structure is still a subject where our understanding is limited. This research examines the relationship between three species of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus (AMF) and soil structural characteristics. Plantago lanceolata was inoculated with one of: Glomus geosporum, Glomus mosseae or Glomus intraradices, and every combination of the fungal species. Infectivity was similar for each individual species, but G. mosseae and G. intraradices together resulted in the lowest per cent root length colonised. Despite the lower percentage colonisation, this combination induced the greatest mycorrhizal growth response. Aggregate stability and aggregate size distribution were unaffected by AMF but were increased by the presence of roots. Microbial biomass-C was also enhanced by roots. Pore size, pore size distribution and nearest neighbour distance were all reduced by G. mosseae and increased by G. intraradices. All AMF inocula containing G. intraradices resulted in greater distances between pores within the experimental soils. Porosity (%) was increased by G. mosseae suggesting that more, smaller pores with less distance between them enhanced overall porosity. Highlights ► Soil aggregate stability was increased by plant roots. ► Aggregate stability was unaffected by arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. ► Pore size was reduced by Glomus mosseae and increased by Glomus intraradices. ► G. mosseae reduced distance between neighbouring soil pores. ► G. intraradices increased distance between neighbouring soil pores.  Introduction Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) form symbiotic associations with most terrestrial plant species (Clapp et al., 2002) and play an important role in plant nutrition (Smith et al., 2011), in protecting the plant from pathogens (Wehner et al., 2010) and from herbivorous insects (Gange et al., 2005). AMF in addition to roots and saprotrophic organisms also contribute to the formation of soil structure and stabilisation (Tisdall and Oades, 1982; Six et al., 2004; Rillig and Mummey, 2006). Roots stabilise soil aggregates through enmeshment and by the release of organic residues that bind soil particles and support many soil organisms, which in turn produce exudates and hyphae that assist in stabilisation (Morel et al., 1991; Jastrow et al., 1998; Hinsinger et al., 2009). These processes also influence the water sorptivity and repellency of soil aggregates (Czarnes et al., 2000; Traoré et al., 2000). AMF are widely acknowledged to benefit soil formation and stabilisation, albeit to varying degrees. AMF develop extraradical hyphae which radiate away from the mycorrhizal roots into the surrounding soil. These hyphae secrete extracellular compounds such as glomalin, glomalin-related soil proteins and polysaccharides which bind soil particles with varying degrees of physical strength and hydrophobicity (Wright and Upadhyaya, 1996, 1998; Wright and Anderson, 2000; Rillig et al., 2002). In addition, hyphal products influence microbiota and food webs which may in turn change the soil structure (Filion et al., 1999; Marschner and Baumann, 2003). Fungal mycelia also exert direct effects on soil structure when hyphae enmesh soil particles (Tisdall and Oades, 1982; Miller and Jastrow, 1990). Hyphal morphology, including width, wall thickness and branching characteristics differs depending on species (Rillig and Mummey, 2006), causing variability in the tensile strength applied to soil. Mycorrhizal fungal diversity influences plant productivity and community composition (Van der Heijden et al., 1998a; Hartnett and Wilson, 1999) and similarly, plant community diversity affects AMF species richness (Johnson et al., 2003); both factors influence soil structure. Rillig and Mummey (2006) argued that an understanding of soil and microbial processes at different scales is required to appreciate the complexities of the systems involved. AMF affect individual plants by modifying root morphology (Van der Heijden et al., 1998b; Copetta et al., 2006) and altering nutrient dynamics (Oliveira et al., 2006). Extraradical mycelium (ERM) can have different forms of growth and different phosphate uptake efficiencies (Jakobsen et al., 1992; Helgason et al., 2002; Munkvold et al., 2004; Avio et al., 2006) that could modify plant growth and soil structure. Van der Heijden et al. (1998b) observed that as the number of AMF taxa within the plant root increased, the shoot and root biomass increased until a certain point after which biomass declined. Schreiner et al. (1997) reported that Glomus mosseae stabilised large aggregates (2-4 mm) whilst Glomus etunicatum and Gigaspora rosea did not. Smaller aggregates were not affected by AMF species. There is therefore evidence that AMF play an important role in stabilising aggregates and in other aspects of maintaining and developing a good soil structure. Nevertheless, there is little information on the effects different species of AMF have on aggregate stability or on soil pore dynamics, or indeed whether different AMF species in disturbed conditions have complimentary functions in relation to soil structure. The aim of this investigation was to determine the relationship between three AMF species, a host plant and the development of soil structure in terms of aggregates and resulting porosity. Soil macrocosms were established which contained sieved homogenous soil, assembled communities of indigenous microflora (originating from a soil-water 'slurry') and Glomus geosporum, G. mosseae and Glomus intraradices individually and in every combination. A split-pot design enabled quantification of the effects that roots, mycorrhizas and hyphae had on aggregate stability, aggregate size distribution, pore size and pore nearest neighbour distance. Drew et al. (2003) demonstrated that pore size affected morphology of G. mosseae and G. intraradices and concluded that extraradical hyphae adapt to the environment but exhibit different levels of adaptability. Here we determine not how the species were affected by pore size but instead, how the species modify pore size and porosity in a homogeneous soil. 