Surface roughness reduction using spray-coated hydrogen silsesquioxane reflow  Graphical abstract Highlights • Spray-coated silsesquioxane coating can be applied to planar and non-planar surfaces. • Cured coating sustains in excess of 10,000 molding cycles. • The peak-to-valley roughness is decreased 10 to 20 times. • Good agreement between mechanical (AFM) and optical (VSI) methods. Abstract Surface roughness or texture is the most visible property of any object, including injection molded plastic parts. Roughness of the injection molding (IM) tool cavity directly affects not only appearance and perception of quality, but often also the function of all manufactured plastic parts. So called "optically smooth" plastic surfaces is one example, where low roughness of a tool cavity is desirable. Such tool surfaces can be very expensive to fabricate using conventional means, such as abrasive diamond polishing or diamond turning. We present a novel process to coat machined metal parts with hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) to reduce their surface roughness. Results from the testing of surfaces made from two starting roughnesses are presented; one polished with grit 2500 sandpaper, another with grit 11.000 diamond polishing paste. We characterize the two surfaces with AFM, SEM and optical profilometry before and after coating. We show that the HSQ coating is able to reduce peak-to-valley roughness more than 20 times on the sandpaper polished sample, from 2.44(±0.99)μm to 104(±22)nm and more than 10 times for the paste polished sample from 1.85(±0.63)μm to 162(±28)nm while roughness averages are reduced 10 and 3 times respectively. We completed more than 10,000 injection molding cycles without detectable degradation of the HSQ coating. This result opens new possibilities for molding of affordable plastic parts with perfect surface finish.  Introduction Roughness of advanced polymer replication tools is costly and challenging to control, especially in case of complex geometries such as tools for freeform optical components, for microfluidic and medical diagnostics devices [1-3] or as substrates for nanopatterned surfaces. Such applications may often require special fabrication of molding tools. Low roughness surfaces fabricated by conventional means, such as abrasive diamond polishing or diamond turning, are often extremely costly. Hard coatings are often required to protect molds and to extend their lifetime. These coatings [4-6] are usually vacuum deposited [7,8] conformal coatings that simply copy an underlying topography, without affecting roughness. Electroplated coatings like hard chrome can even increase roughness. Wet deposited polymer coatings usually do not form sufficiently hard and durable films and the dip coating process may ruin fine features of a mold surface, such as microfluidic channels or micro- and nanopatterned regions. Silsesquioxanes are small, cage-like, organosilicate molecules with the formula [RSiO3/2], with three silicate bonds per silicon atom and one organic substituent R [9]. They tend to form cross-linked, organic-inorganic networks. Such networks may demonstrate features of both a hard, ceramic-like materials and features of a soft, organic material. Properties can be tuned and modified by processing to achieve for instance high final hardness together with solution processing or spin coating. There is a wide range of applications for this sophisticated material, such as optical coatings [10], dielectric insulators [11], barrier coatings, nanocomposites [12], or lithography [13] to name a few. Hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ), where the organic substituent R is simply a hydrogen atom, is an established lithographic resist [14,15] with good contrast and high sensitivity. HSQ resist in a solvent consist of individual cage-like molecules or a partially cross-linked, low molecular mass oligomer. Hence, it flows and can be spray-coated on planar and non-planar surfaces. It can be re-saturated with solvent to reduce surface roughness, as we show in this paper, or it can be (nano)patterned [16-18]. HSQ cross-links after curing and so forms a hard, fused silica-like structure. Patterned HSQ surfaces have previously been used as nanoimprint lithography masters [19]. Prerequisite to use HSQ for an injection molding mold is durability and robustness, which we tested. Hence, a mold comprising of such a cross-linked HSQ surface, is expected to be able to withstand a large number of injection molding cycles. Another viable use of spray-coated HSQ film is repair/refurbishing of injection molds as they are often extremely costly to replace. HSQ mold surfaces can be coated with additional chemicals such as a monolayer of perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS) which further reduces surface energy, sticking and demolding force. While coating of SiO2 [20-23] or cured HSQ [16] nanoimprint lithography tools with an antisticking/release layer is not new, it was suggested [24] and recently shown [25,26] that an FDTS monolayer coating can be successfully used to coat certain injection molding tools. This further reduction of the surface energy is important for a cost effective injection molding of complex and challenging articles such as nanopatterned superhydrophobic surfaces, where a successful part release remains a challenge. 