Scalable expansion of human induced pluripotent stem cells in the defined xeno-free E8 medium under adherent and suspension culture conditions  Abstract Large-scale production of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) by robust and economic methods has been one of the major challenges for translational realization of hiPSC technology. Here we demonstrate a scalable culture system for hiPSC expansion using the E8 chemically defined and xeno-free medium under either adherent or suspension conditions. To optimize suspension conditions guided by a computational simulation, we developed a method to efficiently expand hiPSCs as undifferentiated aggregates in spinner flasks. Serial passaging of two different hiPSC lines in the spinner flasks using the E8 medium preserved their normal karyotype and expression of undifferentiated state markers of TRA-1-60, SSEA4, OCT4, and NANOG. The hiPSCs cultured in spinner flasks for more than 10 passages not only could be remained pluripotent as indicated by in vitro and in vivo assays, but also could be efficiently induced toward mesodermal and hematopoietic differentiation. Furthermore, we established a xeno-free protocol of single-cell cryopreservation and recovery for the scalable production of hiPSCs in spinner flasks. This system is the first to enable an efficient scale-up bioprocess in completely xeno-free condition for the expansion and cryopreservation of hiPSCs with the quantity and quality compliant for clinical applications. Highlights • We report the first suspension culture of hiPSCs using E8 medium. • We report the first hydrodynamic model for glass-ball type spinner flasks. • We establish a scalable bioprocess in completely defined xeno-free conditions. • We optimized a single-cell cryopreservation for hiPSCs in suspension. • Human iPSCs maintained pluripotency and normal karyotype along the bioprocess.  Introduction Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) and human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) that can differentiate into any mature cell type of the body, hold great promise for revolutionizing regenerative medicine. Specifically, the integration-free reprogramming technologies, such as ones using plasmids, provide a feasible method to generate autologous and clinical-grade hiPSC lines for therapeutic applications under current good manufacture practice (cGMP) conditions. Patient-specific hiPSC lines derived from postnatal somatic cells (Chou et al., 2011; Dowey et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2009) exhibit vast potential not only in disease modeling for pathological studies but also in practical cellular therapies. These clinical applications require a large number of hiPSCs or their progenies. For example, an optimized dose was suggested to contain 4.2×108 to 5.6×108 CD34+ cells for hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) transplantation for a 70-kg adult patient (Mehta et al., 2009). Production of a clinically relevant quantity of hiPSCs and/or their progenies for specific applications, sometimes considered as ~1 to 2billion (Kehoe et al., 2010), in a chemically defined condition by robust, reproducible and economic methods remains a major challenge for advancing hiPSC technology from the bench to the clinic. Conventionally, hiPSCs are induced and expanded on feeder cells as adherent colonies in media containing sera or serum replacement containing human or animal serum albumin (Okita et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2007). The involvement of animal products or sera impedes these culture conditions to meet the strict requirement of clinical or pre-clinical utilization because of the uncertainty of complex components and the quality variance from batch to batch. Since the first isolation of hiPSCs, significant improvements in feeder- and serum-free chemically defined culture medium and substrates for adherent hiPSC culture have been developed (Chen et al., 2011; Li et al., 2005; Ludwig et al., 2006; Vallier et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2007). However, these approaches involving adherent culture of hiPSCs in Petri dishes still raise a major hurdle of large scale and well-controlled expansion for clinical use. Suspension culture for hiPSC expansion provides a feasible solution for its scale-up capacity. After a Rho-associated-coiled-coil kinase (ROCK) inhibitor Y27632 was reported to permit the survival of dissociated hESCs when supplemented in the medium only on the first day of seeding (Watanabe et al., 2007), detailed protocols were established for the single-cell inoculation and suspension culture of hPSCs as cell aggregates in a variety of vessel types (Amit et al., 2011; Olmer et al., 2010; Zweigerdt et al., 2011). Other studies have also reported successful suspension culture in spinner flasks in 100-ml vessels (Abbasalizadeh et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2012; Fluri et al., 2012; Krawetz et al., 2010; Olmer et al., 2012; Singh et al., 2010; Steiner et al., 2010). Despite the rapid development of hPSC suspension culture in these studies, most of the reproducible systems are based on commercially available serum-free media, StemPro or mTeSR, which are complex and expensive. The unknown composition (such as StemPro) and high cost of these media pose a major concern for developing reproducible methods for large-scale expansion of hiPSCs. Chen et al. recently reported the development of a significantly improved hiPSC culture medium, E8, which contains only seven other completely defined and xeno-free components supplementing the standard DMEM/F-12 medium (Chen et al., 2011). We did confirm that this significantly improved medium without the need to add bovine serum albumin (BSA) Fraction V or human albumin supported the growth of multiple hiPSC lines under feeder-free conditions in adhesion. Based on this, we sought to test whether the significantly simplified E8 medium could support a robust and economic suspension culture system in a stirred bioreactor for large-scale expansion and cryopreservation of hiPSCs. Here, we used two integration-free hiPSC lines, BC1 and TNC1, which were derived from leukocytes of either a healthy donor or a sickle cell disease patient using plasmid-based episomal vectors (Chou et al., 2011). We began by evaluating the capacity of E8 medium to support the expansion of hiPSCs in static suspension cultures. We then optimized the operating protocol for direct adaptation and expansion of the hiPSCs in spinner flasks using computational simulation of the hydrodynamic properties and experimental tests. Furthermore, we tested serial passaging and differentiation potential of hiPSCs expanded in spinner flasks. Finally, xeno-free cryopreservation and recovery methods were established for hiPSCs cultured in the bioreactor. 