Frontal and superior temporal auditory processing abnormalities in schizophrenia  Abstract Background Although magnetoencephalography (MEG) studies show superior temporal gyrus (STG) auditory processing abnormalities in schizophrenia at 50 and 100ms, EEG and corticography studies suggest involvement of additional brain areas (e.g., frontal areas) during this interval. Study goals were to identify 30 to 130ms auditory encoding processes in schizophrenia (SZ) and healthy controls (HC) and group differences throughout the cortex. Methods The standard paired-click task was administered to 19 SZ and 21 HC subjects during MEG recording. Vector-based Spatial-temporal Analysis using L1-minimum-norm (VESTAL) provided 4D maps of activity from 30 to 130ms. Within-group t-tests compared post-stimulus 50ms and 100ms activity to baseline. Between-group t-tests examined 50 and 100ms group differences. Results Bilateral 50 and 100ms STG activity was observed in both groups. HC had stronger bilateral 50 and 100ms STG activity than SZ. In addition to the STG group difference, non-STG activity was also observed in both groups. For example, whereas HC had stronger left and right inferior frontal gyrus activity than SZ, SZ had stronger right superior frontal gyrus and left supramarginal gyrus activity than HC. Conclusions Less STG activity was observed in SZ than HC, indicating encoding problems in SZ. Yet auditory encoding abnormalities are not specific to STG, as group differences were observed in frontal and SMG areas. Thus, present findings indicate that individuals with SZ show abnormalities in multiple nodes of a concurrently activated auditory network. Highlights • Auditory encoding in schizophrenia (SZ) and healthy controls (HC) was examined. • Distributed source localization provided whole-brain measures from 30 to 130ms. • Abnormalities were observed in superior temporal gyrus (STG) auditory areas in SZ. • Encoding abnormalities were also observed in frontal and supramarginal gyrus areas. • SZ shows abnormalities in multiple nodes of a distributed auditory network.  Introduction Using electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG), a now large number of studies show smaller 100ms auditory amplitudes in individuals with schizophrenia (SZ) than healthy controls (HC). In a review of studies examining N1 and M100 in schizophrenia, Rosburg et al. (2008) concluded that 100ms auditory abnormalities are most commonly observed in studies using interstimulus intervals greater than 1s and that an increase in N1 amplitude by allocation of attention is often lacking in individuals with SZ. Several large-sample studies provide examples. Examining N1 activity in the standard paired-click paradigm, Turetsky et al. (2008) observed a small first and a normal second N1 click response in SZ (N=142) relative to HC (N=221). Reduced N1 was also observed in the unaffected first-degree relatives of individuals with SZ without co-morbid psychiatric or substance use conditions, and N1 amplitude was observed to be a heritable measure and a better endophenotype than N1 gating. In another recent large-N study, Smith et al. (2010) used simultaneous EEG and MEG to examine 100ms auditory processes in individuals with SZ (N=79) and HC (N=73) during a paired-click task. Patients had larger N1 Cz and left and right superior temporal gyrus (STG) M100 ratio scores (second-click/first-click), with EEG and MEG ratio score group differences due to a smaller first click (S1) response in patients, suggesting a deficit in encoding auditory information rather than a deficit in filtering redundant information. N1 (EEG) and M100 (MEG) are the most prominent deflections of the adult auditory event-related potential (ERP) or field (ERF) (Hari, 1990). In an early study, Naatanen and Picton (1987) argued that the electric N1 reflects contributions from up to 6 distinct cortical areas: dipoles in or near the primary auditory cortex as well as prefrontal cortex (PFC) sources. Later studies showed connections between STG and PFC. For example, several studies have demonstrated bidirectional connections between STG and PFC in the rhesus monkey (Knight et al., 1999). Combined tracing and immunohistochemistry studies have revealed that projections from PFC pyramidal neurons make synaptic contact with a subset of calbindin-positive GABAergic interneurons in auditory areas (Barbas et al., 2005). Through these connections, PFC pyramidal neurons may modulate the excitability of microcircuits within the monkey's auditory belt and parabelt (Barbas et al., 2005). Neural tracers infused into auditory cortex have also been found to emerge in PFC axonal terminal (Romanski, 2004; Romanski et al., 1999). Finally, anatomical studies in humans have identified white-matter tracks connecting auditory cortex with lateral and medial PFC. These observations have been corroborated via in vivo imaging (Catani et al., 2002). Taken together, monkey and human studies support the hypothesis that PFC pyramidal neurons modulate the flow of information in auditory cortices by controlling the activity of GABAergic interneurons, which in turn modulate the excitability of STG pyramidal neurons (Barbas et al., 2005). With regard to individuals with SZ, there is evidence of aberrant fronto-temporal connectivity: in a diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) study, Abdul-Rahman et al. (2012) showed that disruption of fronto-temporal white-matter tracks involving arcuate fasciculus may be associated with psychotic features and auditory hallucinations in SZ. Although equivalent current dipole source localization techniques work well to examine 50 and 100ms STG activity (Edgar et al., 2003, 2008; Huang et al., 2003; Smith et al., 2010), equivalent current dipole techniques are likely less optimal in terms of localizing auditory activity in non-STG areas, because activity in non-STG areas is often distributed and thus non-dipolar. The present study reports findings using a lead-field-based source localization method, Vector-based Spatio-temporal Analysis using L1-minimum norm (VESTAL; Huang et al., 2006), to examine auditory processes throughout the brain in HC and in individuals with SZ. 