Mutation of the human mitochondrial phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase causes infantile-onset epilepsy and cytochrome c oxidase deficiency  Abstract Mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) are essential enzymes in protein synthesis since they charge tRNAs with their cognate amino acids. Mutations in the genes encoding mitochondrial aaRSs have been associated with a wide spectrum of human mitochondrial diseases. Here we report the identification of pathogenic mutations (a partial genomic deletion and a highly conserved p. Asp325Tyr missense variant) in FARS2, the gene encoding mitochondrial phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase, in a patient with early-onset epilepsy and isolated complex IV deficiency in muscle. The biochemical defect was expressed in myoblasts but not in fibroblasts and associated with decreased steady state levels of COXI and COXII protein and reduced steady state levels of the mt-tRNAPhe transcript. Functional analysis of the recombinant mutant p. Asp325Tyr FARS2 protein showed an inability to bind ATP and consequently undetectable aminoacylation activity using either bacterial tRNA or human mt-tRNAPhe as substrates. Lentiviral transduction of cells with wildtype FARS2 restored complex IV protein levels, confirming that the p.Asp325Tyr mutation is pathogenic, causing respiratory chain deficiency and neurological deficits on account of defective aminoacylation of mt-tRNAPhe. Highlights • The tissue specific variation in presentation of aaRS mutations is discussed. • A further clinical presentation of a FARS2 defect. • Molecular mechanism of FARS2 defect is characterised in vitro.  Introduction Human mitochondria possess their own translation machinery in order to produce 13 mitochondrially-encoded polypeptides that are subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes. The translation machinery has a dual origin and comprises mitochondrially (mt-) encoded transfer RNAs (mt-tRNAs) and ribosomal RNAs (mt-rRNAs) as well as numerous, nuclear-encoded proteins including mitochondrial ribosomal proteins, initiation, elongation and termination factors, a methionyl-tRNA transformylase and mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Hence, mutations in either the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) [1,2] or the nuclear DNA [3] can cause defects in mitochondrial protein synthesis resulting in a variety of mitochondrial disease phenotypes affecting both children and adults. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) play a key role in the faithful translation of the genetic code since they catalyse the attachment of each amino acid to its cognate tRNA. The human proteome includes two sets of aaRSs that are encoded by nuclear genes and are involved in either cytosolic or mitochondrial protein synthesis [4], with the exception of GARS and KARS that function in both domains. Based on the tRNA recognition mode and the domain organisation, aaRSs are divided into two classes: Class I aaRSs (mainly active as monomers) and Class II enzymes (mainly active as dimers or tetramers) [5]. In recent years, recessively-inherited mutations in a growing number of mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases of both classes have been associated with a diverse spectrum of early-onset mitochondrial clinical presentations [6]. These include mutations in the genes for DARS2 causing leukoencephalopathy with brain stem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation (LBSL) [7,8], RARS2 causing pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 6 (PCH6) [9], YARS2 causing myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia (MLASA) syndrome [10,11], SARS2 causing hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure in infancy and alkalosis (HUPRA) syndrome [12], HARS2 associated with ovarian dysgenesis and sensorineural hearing loss [13], AARS2 causing infantile cardiomyopathy [14], EARS2 associated with leukoencephalopathy [15], MARS2 causing neurodegenerative phenotype in flies and autosomal recessive spastic ataxia frequently associated with leucoencephalopathy (ARSAL) in humans [16], LARS2 associated with premature ovarian failure and hearing loss in Perrault syndrome [17] and KARS, which encodes both the cytosolic and mitochondrial lysl-tRNA synthetases, and is associated with non-syndromic hearing impairment [18]. Recently, mutations have been reported in the FARS2 (mitochondrial phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase) gene in two families with infantile mitochondrial encephalopathy reminiscent of Alpers' syndrome [19,20]. In the present study, we report novel FARS2 mutations including a large scale genomic deletion, in a child with muscle-restricted OXPHOS deficiency associated with intractable infantile epilepsy and abnormal brain MRI findings. 