Sink or source-The potential of coffee agroforestry systems to sequester atmospheric CO2 into soil organic carbon  Highlights • SOC stocks decreased by 12.4% in Costa Rica and 0.13% in Nicaragua after establishment of coffee AFS. • SOC stocks increased in the top 10cm of soil; greater reduction occurred at 20-40cm. • Organic management caused a greater increase in 0-10cm SOC but did not influence reduction at depth. • Shade type effects on SOC were smaller; no significant difference between shaded and unshaded coffee. • SOC stocks tend to converge on a level determined by site environment during establishment. Abstract Current carbon accounting methodologies often assume interactions between above-ground and below-ground carbon, without considering effects of land management. We used data from two long-term coffee agroforestry experiments in Costa Rica and Nicaragua to assess the effect on total soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks of (i) organic versus conventional management, (ii) higher versus moderate agronomic inputs, (iii) tree shade types. During the first nine years of coffee establishment total 0-40cm depth SOC stocks decreased by 12.4% in Costa Rica and 0.13% in Nicaragua. Change in SOC differed consistently amongst soil layers: at 0-10cm SOC stocks increased by 2.14 and 1.26MgCha-1 in Costa Rica and Nicaragua respectively; however much greater reduction occurred at 20-40cm (9.65 and 2.85MgCha-1 respectively). Organic management caused a greater increase in 0-10cm SOC but did not influence its reduction at depth. Effects of shade type were smaller, though heavily pruned legume shade trees produced a greater increase in 0-10cm SOC than unpruned timber trees. No significant differences in SOC stocks were found between shaded and unshaded systems at any depth and SOC was poorly correlated with above-ground biomass stocks highlighting poor validity of "expansion factors" currently used to estimate SOC. SOC stock changes were significantly negatively correlated with initial SOC stock per plot, providing evidence that during establishment of these woody-plant-dominated agricultural systems SOC stocks tend to converge towards a new equilibrium as a function of the change in the quantity and distribution of organic inputs. Therefore it cannot be assumed that tree-based agricultural systems necessarily lead to increases in soil C stocks. While high inputs of organic fertiliser/tree pruning mulch increased surface-layer SOC stocks, this did not affect stocks in deeper soil, where decreases generally exceeded any gains in surface soil. Therefore site- and system-specific sampling is essential to draw meaningful conclusions for climate change mitigation strategies.  Introduction Soils are the greatest terrestrial C stock and hold an estimated 1462-1548Pg of organic C to 1m depth (Batjes, 1996). However, surface soils (0-30cm depth), which store almost half of soil organic carbon (SOC) and up to three times the C stored above-ground in vegetation, are considered to be the most vulnerable to loss as CO2 emissions due to climatic and land-management change, highlighting a major threat to climate regulation (Powlson et al., 2011a). At the same time, it has been widely recognised that practices which maintain SOC stocks are important in ensuring the sustainability of soil functions (Lal, 2004; Nair et al., 2009a; Powlson et al., 2011a). Identifying how different agricultural management practices or changes in land-use create SOC sinks (accumulating additional C), act as C sources (emitting C) or maintain stocks at current levels is imperative in identifying effective strategies for land-based climate change mitigation. Agriculture that is established on land depleted in SOC will have potential to sequester C. However, some practices such as addition of organic matter that may increase SOC can also increase N2O emissions. In addition, it is not always clear how farm annual GHG flux may be altered by change in SOC stock, as this tends to occur slowly and with an uncertain trajectory. Therefore, assessment of how best to achieve climate change mitigation through agriculture needs to consider both short-term changes in GHG emissions from soil and longer-term changes in SOC stocks (Lal, 2004; Smith et al., 2008). To get a whole-system perspective this should be combined with assessment of changes in other C pools, such as above- and below-ground biomass and litter (e.g. of shade trees or crops such as coffee). Agroforestry systems (AFS) have been recognised for their potential to sequester large amounts of C above ground (and in some cases below ground into SOC) (Albrecht and Kandji, 2003; Nair et al., 2009a; Soto-Pinto et al., 2010; Verchot et al., 2007). Nair et al. (2009a) have suggested an area of more than 1000million (M) ha globally to be currently managed under AFS, including silvopastoral systems, with 630Mha more estimated to be suitable for conversion of unproductive croplands and grasslands to AFS (IPCC, 2000). This suggests a great potential for further above- and below-ground C sequestration. It is commonly believed that AFS enhance SOC stocks compared with tree-less annual crop systems (Nair et al., 2009b). However, much of this evidence is based on changes in the SOC of surface soils and little has been published on the effects of trees on stocks deeper in the soil. Understanding of the soil processes involved is still limited, making it difficult to predict accurately changes in SOC over time (Nair et al., 2009b). Much evidence of increases in SOC stocks after changes in agricultural management is based on extrapolation from rates of C sequestration by growing plants using weak evidence about the processes by which this might influence SOC stocks (which can be positive or negative (Sanderman and Jeffrey, 2010)). As a result of the complexity of assessing long-term SOC change, it had until recently been largely excluded from carbon accounting within land-based projects for international carbon markets, which tended to focus only on above-ground C as it is relatively easy to measure and model (IPCC, 2006). Recently, SOC has been included as a C pool within respected accounting methodologies, e.g. in four out of the seven used for small-scale afforestation and reforestation under the CDM pool (UNFCCC, 2011). However, all except one use a default value of an increase in SOC of 0.5MgCha-1year-1 for a C accounting period of 20 years following afforestation or reforestation of land. Similarly, the UNFCCC (2011) methodology specifies accounting by means of an assessment tool which is based on climatic default values that only allow for an increase in SOC, with a maximum value of 0.8MgCha-1year-1. Although initial losses of SOC through site preparation are recognised, the potential for reduction of SOC due to tree establishment is not accounted for. Use of these default values is rarely replaced by monitoring of actual changes in SOC stocks ex post, which might, in fact, reveal longer-term decreases in SOC (Bashkin and Binkley, 1998). Coffee production systems occupy over 10 million ha globally (FAO, 2011) so their design and management have potentially major importance for land-based C flux and storage. The aim of this study was to advance understanding of the extent to which producing coffee with shade trees (coffee agroforestry systems - CAFS) change SOC stocks and whether this provides a viable climate change mitigation strategy. Major variables in CAFS as implemented by farmers in Central America that we hypothesised would affect SOC stocks are: (i) the use of shade trees versus full-sun, (ii) amongst shade trees the use of timber species (unpruned, therefore predominantly providing only a litter input above-ground) versus nitrogen-fixing species that are frequently and heavily pruned; (iii) conventional chemical fertilisation versus organic fertilisation; (iv) the level at which these inputs are applied. By using experimental comparison of these specific variations amongst types of CAFS, this study sought to improve our understanding of the C cycle, the effects of coffee shade management on sequestration of C in soil relative to that in above-ground biomass, and the extent to which SOC should be taken into account in coffee-farm C projects considering the relative merits of alternative land-use C-accounting methods. The specific objectives were to investigate (a) how the addition and management of trees in agricultural systems change total SOC stocks through the soil profile and (b) how agronomic management affects SOC stocks in comparison with the effects of the trees. We evaluated these by assessing the differences in SOC firstly between shaded and un-shaded (full sun) coffee farming systems, and the effect that tree pruning has within shaded systems, and secondly between conventional and organic management, each with different input levels. 