Leaving flatland: Diagnostics for Lagrangian coherent structures in three-dimensional flows  Abstract Finite-time Lyapunov exponents (FTLE) are often used to identify Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS). Most applications are confined to flows on two-dimensional (2D) surfaces where the LCS are characterized as curves. The extension to three-dimensional (3D) flows, whose LCS are 2D structures embedded in a 3D volume, is theoretically straightforward. However, in geophysical flows at regional scales, full prognostic computation of the evolving 3D velocity field is not computationally feasible. The vertical or diabatic velocity, then, is either ignored or estimated as a diagnostic quantity with questionable accuracy. Even in cases with reliable 3D velocities, it may prove advantageous to minimize the computational burden by calculating trajectories from velocities on carefully chosen surfaces only. When reliable 3D velocity information is unavailable or one velocity component is explicitly ignored, a reduced FTLE form to approximate 2D LCS surfaces in a 3D volume is necessary. The accuracy of two reduced FTLE formulations is assessed here using the ABC flow and a 3D quadrupole flow as test models. One is the standard approach of knitting together FTLE patterns obtained on adjacent surfaces. The other is a new approximation accounting for the dispersion due to vertical (u,v) shear. The results are compared with those obtained from the full 3D velocity field. We introduce two diagnostic quantities to identify situations when a fully 3D computation is required for an accurate determination of the 2D LCS. For the ABC flow, we found the full 3D calculation to be necessary unless the vertical (u,v) shear is sufficiently small. However, both methods compare favorably with the 3D calculation for the quadrupole model scaled to typical open ocean conditions. Highlights • Approximations of 2D Lagrangian coherent structures in 3D flows are studied. • Vertical shear is shown to be important in the three-dimensional flows. • A new approximate Cauchy-Green tensor without using vertical velocities is proposed. • Two velocity gradient diagnostics help to decide when the full 3D velocity is needed.  Introduction Hassan Aref's 1984 seminal paper on chaotic advection [1] initiated a new direction for fluid mechanics research. Dynamical systems theory (DST) has provided a theoretical and computational basis for much of the subsequent developments. DST methods are now widely used to identify critical material structures that govern transport patterns. In geophysical flows, these structures persist from a few hours to weeks. They are precisely identified by evolving distinguished invariant manifolds. Jones and Winkler [2] provide a widely used algorithm for computing such manifolds in two-dimensional (2D) flows. The methodology has been extended to three-dimensional (3D) dynamical systems by Branicki and Wiggins [3]. Although theoretically appealing, invariant manifold calculations are tedious and not easily automated. Consequently, a much simpler, easily automated approach for determining approximate transport barriers from finite-time Lyapunov exponents (FTLE) has been developed [4-6]. The patterns in FTLE and related diagnostic fields are now known in the literature as Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS). It is well known that LCS delineated by invariant manifolds and those derived from FTLE are equivalent for simple analytically prescribed flows. However, this appears not to be true generally. Branicki and Wiggins [7] made an extensive comparison of both methods and established useful criteria for identifying when they are in agreement. Here, we study FTLE, with the expectation that our conclusions apply to the identification of transport barriers, within the provisos established by Branicki and Wiggins [7]. It is noteworthy that other diagnostics of LCS have been proposed [8-14]. All LCS diagnostics have attributes that are appropriate for particular situations. Moreover, our impression is that all diagnostics agree when there are clear and robust LCS signatures. Since all diagnostics are derived from trajectories, the effects of the approximations discussed here are likely to carry over to approaches other than FTLE as well. Most studies that use DST methods to identify transport barriers have considered Hamiltonian-type flows and been restricted to 2D ([15], and references therein). This restriction, however, is not a theoretical limitation, since the mathematical constructs have no dimensional requirements [16]. Indeed, several applications of DST methods to idealized 3D flows have been published[17-21,7]. Haller [22] developed a theoretical framework for calculating LCS in 3D flows and applied it to steady and unsteady Arnold-Beltrami-Childress (ABC) flows. Lekien et al. [23] extended LCS theory to n-dimensional systems. These and other studies have provided considerable theoretical insight into the topology of stirring and mixing in 2D and 3D flows. However, they are largely based on analytically prescribed flows or simple numerical models. Extensions of 2D methods to realistic 3D flows present a number of challenges that are not addressed in these studies. Some computational fluid dynamics studies require millions of particle trajectories to adequately resolve the complexity of the 2D LCS in 3D flows. To reduce the prohibitive associated computational cost, alternative algorithms that rely on reduced representations of the Cauchy-Green tensor have been proposed [24]. The approach of using a reduced Cauchy-Green tensor is attractive in the context of 3D geophysical flows, since the computation of 3D trajectories is hampered by a lack of reliable information about diabatic (atmosphere) or vertical (ocean) velocities. These velocities are typically orders of magnitude smaller than the other two velocity components, and in many cases they are diagnostic variables recovered outside the prognostic model update cycle. The value of including the effects of approximate diabatic or vertical velocities in LCS computations remains unclear. As most geophysical flows are nearly 2D, one might anticipate vertical particle excursions to be negligible. However, small vertical excursions can lead to significant horizontal end point differences due to vertical (u,v) shear [25]. 