Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Models of Progranulin-Deficient Frontotemporal Dementia Uncover Specific Reversible Neuronal Defects  Summary The pathogenic mechanisms of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) remain poorly understood. Here we generated multiple induced pluripotent stem cell lines from a control subject, a patient with sporadic FTD, and an FTD patient with a novel heterozygous GRN mutation (progranulin [PGRN] S116X). In neurons and microglia differentiated from PGRN S116X induced pluripotent stem cells, the levels of intracellular and secreted PGRN were reduced, establishing patient-specific cellular models of PGRN haploinsufficiency. Through a systematic screen of inducers of cellular stress, we found that PGRN S116X neurons, but not sporadic FTD neurons, exhibited increased sensitivity to staurosporine and other kinase inhibitors. Moreover, the serine/threonine kinase S6K2, a component of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways, was specifically downregulated in PGRN S116X neurons. Both increased sensitivity to kinase inhibitors and reduced S6K2 were rescued by PGRN expression. Our findings identify cell-autonomous, reversible defects in patient neurons with PGRN deficiency, and provide a compelling model for studying PGRN-dependent pathogenic mechanisms and testing potential therapies. Graphical Abstract Highlights ► A human neuron model of progranulin (PGRN) haploinsufficiency is established ► Sporadic and PGRN-deficient frontotemporal dementia patient iPSCs are made ► PGRN S116X mutant neurons are sensitive to stress by kinase inhibitors ► S6K2 is downregulated in patient neurons in a PGRN-dependent manner Progranulin (PGRN) mutations are a common cause of frontotemporal dementia, but the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. Gao and colleagues now generate multiple frontotemporal dementia patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell lines and establish a human neuronal model of PGRN haploinsufficiency. Studies on human postmitotic neurons derived from these lines reveal cell-autonomous and reversible defects in specific signaling pathways that are compromised in PGRN-deficient neurons and establish a model system for studying PGRN-dependent pathogenic mechanisms and testing potential therapies.  Introduction Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), the second most common form of presenile dementia before the age of 65, is associated with focal atrophy of the frontal or temporal lobes and deficits in cognition, behavior, and language (Boxer and Miller, 2005). Mutations that cause FTD have been identified in several genes, including those encoding valosin-containing protein (VCP; Watts et al., 2004), charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B; Skibinski et al., 2005), progranulin (PGRN; Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006), and chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9ORF72; DeJesus-Hernandez et al., 2011; Renton et al., 2011). It is not known how these diverse mutations cause similar clinical manifestations, and no effective treatment is available. The secreted glycoprotein PGRN has been implicated in cell growth and survival, inflammation, synaptic functions, and other cellular functions (He and Bateman, 2003; Yin et al., 2010; Tapia et al., 2011). Although most (if not all) pathogenic mutations in GRN lead to pathological changes in FTD due to PGRN haploinsufficiency (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006), the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. PGRN mutations are a common cause of FTD. However, no robust pathological phenotype has been found in Grn+/- mice, and selective neuronal cell loss is limited even in Grn knockout mice (Ahmed et al., 2010; Ghoshal et al., 2012; Petkau et al., 2012; Yin et al., 2010). Thus, a more suitable model for dissecting the pathogenic mechanisms that underlie PGRN haploinsufficiency is needed. The ability to generate human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) offers an unprecedented opportunity to analyze the molecular consequences of pathogenic mutations in the context of the unique genetic background of individual patients (Yamanaka, 2007). Indeed, iPSCs have been generated from patients with different neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Dimos et al., 2008; Ebert et al., 2009; Soldner et al., 2009; Nguyen et al., 2011; Israel et al., 2012). In this study, we generated multiple FTD-patient-specific iPSC lines and established a human neuronal model of PGRN haploinsufficiency. From studies of human postmitotic neurons derived from these lines, we identify cell-autonomous and reversible defects in specific signaling pathways that are compromised in PGRN-deficient neurons. 