Generation of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy-specific induced pluripotent stem cells  Abstract Familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP) is a hereditary amyloidosis induced by amyloidogenic transthyretin (ATTR). Because most transthyretin (TTR) in serum is synthesized by the liver, liver transplantation (LT) is today the only treatment available to halt the progression of FAP, even though LT is associated with several problems. Despite the urgent need to develop alternatives to LT, the detailed pathogenesis of FAP is still unknown; also, no model fully represents the relevant processes in patients with FAP. The induction of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells has allowed development of pluripotent cells specific for patients and has led to useful models of human diseases. Because of the need for a tool to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of FAP, in this study we sought to establish heterozygous ATTR mutant iPS cells, and were successful, by using a Sendai virus vector mixture containing four transcription factors (Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc) to reprogram dermal fibroblasts derived from FAP patients. Moreover, FAP-specific iPS cells had the potential to differentiate into hepatocyte-like cells and indeed expressed ATTR. FAP-specific iPS cells demonstrated the possibility of serving as a pathological tool that will contribute to understanding the pathogenesis of FAP and development of FAP treatments. Highlights • We established, for the first time, FAP-specific iPS cells by using a Sendai virus. • FAP-specific iPS cells have potential to differentiate into hepatocyte-like cells. • Hepatocyte-like cells from FAP-specific iPS cells indeed expressed ATTR Val30Met. • FAP-specific iPS cells demonstrate the possibility to serve as a pathological tool.  Introduction Transthyretin (TTR) is a β-sheet-rich protein that is mainly synthesized by the liver (Buxbaum and Reixach, 2009). TTR normally serves as a plasma transport protein for thyroid hormone and retinol-binding protein with vitamin A (Kanai et al., 1968). Mutant forms of TTR, however, cause familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP), which is the most common type of autosomal-dominant hereditary systemic amyloidosis (Saraiva et al., 1983; Ando et al., 2005). As of today, more than 100 different points of mutation and a deletion in the TTR gene have been reported (Westermark et al., 2002; Ando and Ueda, 2012; Benson and Kincaid, 2007), with the Val30Met mutation being the most common. Systemic amyloid depositions in FAP cause various symptoms, including cardiac and renal dysfunctions, gastrointestinal disorders, glandular and autonomic dysfunctions, and peripheral neuropathy (Ando and Suhr, 1998; Ando et al., 1993, 1997; Araki, 1984). Because the liver synthesizes most of the TTR in the serum, liver transplantation (LT) is the only treatment available to halt the progression of FAP (Ando et al., 1995a; Suhr et al., 1995). Although LT is widely accepted as the only lifesaving treatment option for FAP patients (Ando et al., 1995b), LT involves several problems, such as a shortage of liver donors, the effects of immunosuppressants, and the progression of ocular disorders caused by a continuing production of amyloidogenic TTR (ATTR) by the retina (Ong et al., 1994; Kawaji et al., 2005). Despite an urgent need to develop alternatives to LT, details about the mechanism of amyloid formation in FAP are still unknown. Although attempts were made to establish experimental models of FAP, a suitable tool is not yet available (Buxbaum et al., 2003; Pokrzywa et al., 2007; Berg et al., 2009). Because FAP is an autosomal-dominant inherited disease, TTR secreted into plasma is the heterotetrameric mixture of wild-type TTR and variant TTR. However, all TTRs used in experiments have been homotetramers, and an artificial Val30Met-overexpressed cell system does not fully represent the relevant processes in patients with FAP (Sousa et al., 2000; Cardoso et al., 2008; Sato et al., 2007). Therefore, an urgent need exists to establish an experimental model such as heterozygous ATTR mutant cells derived from FAP patients. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have an unlimited replicative ability and the potential to differentiate into most cell types in organisms (Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006; Takahashi et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2007). The creation of iPS cells has permitted the development of patient-specific pluripotent cells and has led to useful models of human diseases (Saha and Jaenisch, 2009). Recent studies reported success in generating patient-specific iPS cells for various diseases including neurologic (Dimos et al., 2008; Ebert et al., 2009; Soldner et al., 2009), hematologic (Raya et al., 2009), and metabolic disorders (Maehr et al., 2009). A report on spinal muscular atrophy-specific iPS cells suggested applications to disease modeling and drug screening by showing the disease-specific changes in cell survival and function (Ebert et al., 2009). A report on Fanconi anemia-specific iPS cells also indicated a potential value for cell therapy by correcting the genetic defect before iPS cell derivation (Raya et al., 2009). Thus, although disease-specific iPS cells may help therapeutic research, iPS cells from patients with FAP have not yet been generated. In this study, we first report the generation of iPS cells from patients with FAP ATTR Val30Met, which we achieved by reprogramming their fibroblasts with a mixture of Sendai virus (SeV) vector, which does not integrate into the host genome (Li et al., 2000) and has a low risk of tumorigenicity, encoding four transcription factors: octamer 3/4 (Oct3/4), sex-determining region Y box 2 (Sox2), Kruppel-like factor 4 (Klf4), and c-Myc (Fusaki et al., 2009; Ban et al., 2011). FAP-specific iPS cells indeed differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells (Shiraki et al., 2008; Shiraki et al., 2011) and expressed Val30Met ATTR. FAP-specific iPS cells may thus provide valuable experimental tools to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of FAP with a potential value for cell therapy applications. 