Analysis of Transcription Factors Key for Mouse Pancreatic Development Establishes NKX2-2 and MNX1 Mutations as Causes of Neonatal Diabetes in Man  Summary Understanding transcriptional regulation of pancreatic development is required to advance current efforts in developing beta cell replacement therapies for patients with diabetes. Current knowledge of key transcriptional regulators has predominantly come from mouse studies, with rare, naturally occurring mutations establishing their relevance in man. This study used a combination of homozygosity analysis and Sanger sequencing in 37 consanguineous patients with permanent neonatal diabetes to search for homozygous mutations in 29 transcription factor genes important for murine pancreatic development. We identified homozygous mutations in 7 different genes in 11 unrelated patients and show that NKX2-2 and MNX1 are etiological genes for neonatal diabetes, thus confirming their key role in development of the human pancreas. The similar phenotype of the patients with recessive mutations and mice with inactivation of a transcription factor gene support there being common steps critical for pancreatic development and validate the use of rodent models for beta cell development. Graphical Abstract Highlights • Homozygous mutations in seven pancreatic transcription factors cause neonatal diabetes • Homozygous NKX2-2 and MNX1 mutations were found in five patients • Confirms NKX2-2 and MNX1 are critical for murine and human pancreas development • Similar phenotypes in mouse and man validate models for beta cell development Analyzing a large collection of consanguineous patients with permanent neonatal diabetes, Flanagan et al. performed a comprehensive search for recessive mutations in transcription factors known to be critical for mouse pancreatic development. They identify seven pancreatic transcription factors that cause neonatal diabetes, including NKX2-2 and MNX1.  Introduction Knowledge on transcriptional regulators of pancreatic development and beta cell differentiation is essential for the development of beta cell replacement therapies for diabetes (Kroon et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2008). While major work has been undertaken in mice, the extent to which murine pancreatic development is a good model for man is not fully understood. Finding inactivating mutations in patients with diabetes can establish the role of a gene in human pancreatic development and function. Comparing the human phenotype with mouse models for the same gene is important, as it validates that the gene function is similar in man and mouse. Concordant phenotypes between mouse models with biallelic gene inactivation and humans with biallelic mutations suggest similar function of the gene product in rodents and man. For example, biallelic GCK mutations in humans cause permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM), and mice lacking both copies of the gene have severe hyperglycemia at birth (Njølstad et al., 2001; Terauchi et al., 1995). 