Preparation and characterization of a dual-layer carbon film on 6H-SiC wafer using carbide-derived carbon process with subsequent chemical vapor deposition  Abstract It is reported that a dual-layer carbon film on SiC wafer is prepared using carbide-derived carbon (CDC) process with subsequent chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The dual-layer film includes a sub-layer of CDC and a top layer of CVD, which are prepared by chlorination of SiC and pyrolysis of CCl4 at high temperature respectively. The CDC and CVD layers are mainly amorphous. And similar dispersion effects are observed in the Raman spectra, although the D-band position of the CVD layer shifts to higher wavenumber (~1354cm-1) than that of the CDC layer (~1337cm-1). Surface chemistry analysis suggests that the unstable chemical bonds, mainly C-Cl, as well as dangling bonds in the CDC layer play an important role in promoting the nucleation of CVD carbon. The surface morphology evolvement from SiC wafer to CDC layer and to dual-layer film is investigated by atomic force microscopy [AFM] and field emission scanning electronic microscopy [FESEM]. The nanoporous surface formed in the CDC process is favorable for capturing carbon species from the gas phase and can act as a "seedbed" for the nucleation and growth of CVD layer. The primary tribological study indicates that the dual-layer film shows great advantages in friction reduction and wear resistance with comparison to SiC and CDC layer, suggesting its potential in lubrication for SiC-based moving components. Graphical abstract Highlights • The dual-layer carbon film is prepared using CDC process with subsequent CVD method. • The surface of the CDC layer is highly porous in structure and chemically active. • The CDC layer acts as a seedbed layer for the nucleation and growth of the CVD layer. • The dual-layer film is tested as an effective lubricating coating for SiC components.  Introduction Because of their unique properties, such as high hardness, good corrosion resistance, and excellent chemical stability, SiC materials are widely used for tribological applications in extreme conditions [1]. However, the friction and wear coefficients of SiC materials are unacceptably high in unlubricated conditions [2]. To improve the tribological properties, carbon coatings such as diamond and diamond like carbon (DLC), are usually coated on such materials using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process [3-5]. Although the CVD process is well established, the search for new methods for depositing carbon films continues. A promising method for coating carbon films on SiC termed the "carbide-derived carbon" or CDC process is greatly attractive in recent years [6]. In this method, SiC is treated in a chlorine-containing gas mixture at high temperature, and the Si atoms preferentially react with Cl2 and leave the system in the form of SiCl4 [7]. The left carbon atoms rearrange themselves and form a smooth carbon film that is intimately bonded to the underlying SiC substrate. Compared with CVD process, the CDC process can easily produce a thick carbon layer (above 100um) at a high rate [6,7]. The CDC with unique nanostructure possesses many attractive physical, mechanical, and tribological properties. In particular, it is reported in recent studies that the CDC coating can afford very low friction and wear to improve the tribological performance of the carbides. Specifically, this coating can provide a friction coefficient of 0.03-0.3 and wear rate of 10-9-10-7mm3/N·m depending on the chlorination process and friction test conditions [8-10]. Surprisingly, the CDC coating with high porosity (i.e.>57.2% for β-SiC [11]) shows excellent tribological properties under dry friction condition. However, unpublished studies in our group confirm that the CDC coating is helpless in lubricating for SiC materials under some conditions, including high temperature (i.e. at 300°C), water or oil lubrication and high load. The lubrication failure is attributed to the high porosity and the low strength of CDC coating. Further surface modification to improve the density and strength of CDC coating is urgent for extensive tribology application. Although there is little pertinent research on such work to date, some information can still be obtained in some literature. Grannen and Chang [12] deposited diamond films from fluorocarbon gases in microwave plasma on SiC and WC substrates without any pretreatments. The proposed growth mechanism suggests that the surface carbon layer formed by the etching of carbide substrates with fluorine atomic favors the nucleation of diamond. It is reported that ultrananocrystalline diamond (UNCD) could also be deposited on the CDC films using microwave plasma CVD reactor and the tetrahedrally bonded carbon in the CDC films is suggested as a good seed for UNCD deposition [13]. Accordingly, we attempt to prepare a novel dual-layer carbon coating on 6H-SiC wafers using CDC technique with subsequent CVD process in the present work. According to our considerations, the CDC layer which is formed by chlorination of SiC acts as a seed and intermediate layer for subsequent deposition. The CVD process is operated in a same reactor using CCl4 as carbon source. We used Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to determine the microstructure and chemistry of CDC and CVD films. And friction and wear properties of the CDC and dual-layer film are discussed. It is expected that this dual-layer film can provide better lubrication for SiC materials in many applications. 