Analysis of SOX2-Expressing Cell Populations Derived from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells  Summary SOX2 is involved in several cell and developmental processes, including maintenance of embryonic stem cells, differentiation of neural progenitor cells, and patterning of gut endoderm. To study its role in a human system, we generated a human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line harboring a reporter gene encoding GFP in the SOX2 locus. This SOX2 reporter line faithfully recapitulates expression of the SOX2 gene in undifferentiated human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs), and anterior foregut endoderm (AFE). In undifferentiated hESCs, GFP expression corresponds to those cells with highest levels of expression of genes associated with the pluripotent state. In NPCs, expression of GFP can be employed to isolate cells expressing markers associated with NPC multipotency. In AFE, we used transcriptome-wide expression analysis to identify cell surface markers with elevated expression in this population, thereby facilitating isolation and purification of this hPSC-derived cell population. Highlights A SOX2-GFP hESC line is used to isolate and characterize multiple cell types A cell surface marker signature allows for the purification of endodermal progeny Targeted gene insertion with adeno-associated virus (AAV) is highly efficient SOX2 is expressed during multiple developmental stages. Brafman, Willert, and colleagues used human embryonic stem cells carrying a SOX2 reporter to characterize its expression in undifferentiated cells and in neural and lung progenitor cells. This approach led to the identification of a cell surface signature to isolate prospective lung progenitors.  Introduction Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs; including human embryonic stem cells [hESCs] and human induced pluripotent stem cells [hiPSCs]), provide a unique model system to study early human development and generate mature and functional cell types suitable for disease modeling, cell transplantation, and replacement therapies. Clinical applications of hPSCs will require a detailed understanding of the mechanisms that maintain their pluripotency or result in their differentiation to specific lineages. A particularly attractive method to study the underlying mechanisms that control pluripotency and differentiation is through the use of marker cell lines in which specific genes known to function in these processes are modified with a "molecular beacon," such as a gene encoding a fluorescent protein. Expression of such a tagged gene can be used to analyze and characterize the cells in which expression of this gene is either activated or repressed. Here, we describe the generation and characterization of such a marker line for the gene SOX2, which plays multiple roles in hPSC pluripotency and differentiation (Arnold et al., 2011; Lefebvre et al., 2007). SOX2 is a member of the SRY-related high-mobility-group box (SOX) transcription factors and controls cell fate and differentiation in a variety of cell types during development (Kiefer, 2007; Lefebvre et al., 2007). During the initial stages of development, SOX2 is expressed in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst (Lorthongpanich et al., 2008; Rossant, 2004) and along with OCT4 is responsible for regulating the pluripotent precursors that develop into the three germ layers (Avilion et al., 2003). SOX2 acts in coordination with other factors, such as NANOG (Wang et al., 2006) and OCT4 (Nichols et al., 1998), to maintain ESCs in a pluripotent state. Furthermore, ectopic expression of SOX2 along with OCT4, KLF4, and c-MYC can induce a pluripotent stem cell state from adult human fibroblasts, giving rise to hiPSCs (Takahashi et al., 2007). In addition to regulating the pluripotent state, SOX2 controls the formation of several cell types during fetal development, such as the nervous system (Ellis et al., 2004), anterior foregut endoderm (Que et al., 2007), and sensory cells of the taste bud and inner ear (Dabdoub et al., 2008; Kiernan et al., 2005; Okubo et al., 2006). SOX2 also regulates the progenitor cells in several adult tissues in the brain (Ellis et al., 2004), trachea (Que et al., 2009), and pituitary glands (Fauquier et al., 2008). A recent genetic lineage tracing study revealed that SOX2 regulates adult stem cells and tissue homeostasis in several adult epithelial tissues in the stomach, cervix, anus, testes, lens, and glands associated with the oral cavity, trachea, and cervix (Arnold et al., 2011). In this study, we describe the generation and characterization of a hESC line in which the endogenous SOX2 locus was targeted to express GFP. The targeted reporter line facilitated the flow-cytometry-based purification and genetic assessment of SOX2-positive (SOX2+) cells in pluripotent hESCs as well as hESC-derived neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and anterior foregut endoderm (AFE). Genome-wide analysis of SOX2+ AFE cells revealed a global gene expression signature that distinguished hESC-derived AFE cells from other cell types. This signature included two cell surface markers that permitted purification of SOX2+ AFE cells from differentiating hESC cultures. Therefore, this SOX2-GFP reporter line is a valuable tool to dissect the role of SOX2 in regulating pluripotency, self-renewal, and differentiation. 