The escape of heavy atoms from the ionosphere of HD209458b. I. A photochemical-dynamical model of the thermosphere  Highlights ► We developed a new model to explain the FUV transit observations of HD209458b. ► We find a qualitative agreement between the model and the observed atmosphere. ► We constrain the mass loss rate and escape mechanism based on stellar heating. ► We present density profiles for the detected heavy atoms and ions. ► Diffusive separation of heavy species is prevented by the escape of H and protons. Abstract The detections of atomic hydrogen, heavy atoms and ions surrounding the extrasolar giant planet (EGP) HD209458b constrain the composition, temperature and density profiles in its upper atmosphere. Thus the observations provide guidance for models that have so far predicted a range of possible conditions. We present the first hydrodynamic escape model for the upper atmosphere that includes all of the detected species in order to explain their presence at high altitudes, and to further constrain the temperature and velocity profiles. This model calculates the stellar heating rates based on recent estimates of photoelectron heating efficiencies, and includes the photochemistry of heavy atoms and ions in addition to hydrogen and helium. The composition at the lower boundary of the escape model is constrained by a full photochemical model of the lower atmosphere. We confirm that molecules dissociate near the 1μbar level, and find that complex molecular chemistry does not need to be included above this level. We also confirm that diffusive separation of the detected species does not occur because the heavy atoms and ions collide frequently with the rapidly escaping H and H+. This means that the abundance of the heavy atoms and ions in the thermosphere simply depends on the elemental abundances and ionization rates. We show that, as expected, H and O remain mostly neutral up to at least 3Rp, whereas both C and Si are mostly ionized at significantly lower altitudes. We also explore the temperature and velocity profiles, and find that the outflow speed and the temperature gradients depend strongly on the assumed heating efficiencies. Our models predict an upper limit of 8000K for the mean (pressure averaged) temperature below 3Rp, with a typical value of 7000K based on the average solar XUV flux at 0.047AU. We use these temperature limits and the observations to evaluate the role of stellar energy in heating the upper atmosphere.  Introduction The detection of hot atomic hydrogen in the upper atmosphere of HD209458b (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2003, 2004) has inspired numerous attempts to model physical and chemical processes in highly irradiated atmospheres, including rapid escape as one of the most challenging aspects. Subsequent detection of heavy atoms and ions (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2004; Linsky et al., 2010) point out the need for more complex models that include the chemistry associated with these species as well as the collision coupling between them and the major species. Indeed, close-in extrasolar planets offer a natural laboratory to constrain the theory of rapid escape, including hydrodynamic escape. This is important because aspects of the theory are controversial, and yet rapid escape is believed to have played a role in shaping the early evolution of the atmospheres in the Solar System (e.g., Zahnle and Kasting, 1986; Hunten et al., 1987). Escape may also be a crucial factor in determining atmospheric conditions and habitability of super-Earths and Earth-like planets around M dwarfs (e.g., Tarter et al., 2007) that may be amenable to spectroscopic studies in the near future (e.g., Charbonneau et al., 2009). The basic ideas about the nature of the upper atmospheres around close-in EGPs were laid out almost as soon as the first planet, 51 Peg b (Mayor and Queloz, 1995), was detected. For instance, Coustenis et al. (1998) argued that heating by the stellar EUV radiation and interaction with the stellar wind leads to high temperatures of several thousand Kelvins in the upper atmosphere and exosphere of close-in EGPs. They also suggested that the upper atmosphere is primarily composed of atoms and ions, and that hydrodynamic escape might be able to drag species heavier than H and He into the exosphere. At the same time, Schneider et al. (1998) argued that material escaping from the atmospheres of close-in EGPs would form a potentially observable comet-like tail. When Vidal-Madjar et al. (2003, 2004) detected the transits of HD209458b in the stellar FUV emission lines, they also argued that the planet is followed by comet-like tail of escaping hydrogen, and that hydrodynamic escape is required to drag oxygen and carbon atoms to the thermosphere. The model of Yelle (2004, 2006) was the first attempt to model the aeronomy and escape processes in detail and most of the assumptions in that work have been adopted by subsequent investigators. It solved the vertical equations of continuity, momentum, and energy for an escaping atmosphere, including photochemistry in the ionosphere and transfer of stellar XUV radiation. Based on a composition of hydrogen and helium, the results demonstrated that H2 dissociates in the thermosphere, which at high altitudes is dominated by H and H+. The model also showed that stellar heating leads to temperatures of ∼10,000K in the upper atmosphere, and predicted an energy-limited mass loss rate of 4.7×107kgs-1 (Yelle, 2006). Yelle (2004) argued that conditions beyond ∼3Rp were too complex and uncertain to be modeled reliably and therefore chose an upper boundary at 3Rp, rather than at infinity, as adopted in early solar wind models. This led to a requirement for boundary conditions for the fluid equations at a finite radius. Yelle (2004) required consistency between fluid and kinetic simulations, based on the well established fact that kinetic and fluid approaches provide consistent results for the escape flux (e.g., Lemaire and Scherer, 1973). This led to subsonic velocities of a few kms-1 in his model - although the presence of a sonic point at a higher altitude was not ruled out. Many other models for the upper atmospheres of close-in EGPs have been published (e.g., Lammer et al., 2003; Lecavelier des Etangs et al., 2004; Jaritz et al., 2005; Tian et al., 2005; Erkaev et al., 2007; Garcia Munoz, 2007; Schneiter et al., 2007; Penz et al., 2008; Holström et al., 2008; Murray-Clay et al., 2009; Stone and Proga, 2009; Guo, 2011; Trammell et al., 2011). These include one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional models that make different assumptions regarding heating efficiency, the effect of stellar tides, photochemistry, and the escape mechanism. Despite significant differences in the temperature and velocity profiles, almost all of the existing models agree that close-in EGPs such as HD209458b are surrounded by an extended, hot thermosphere that is undergoing some form of escape. Most of the models to date concentrate on the distribution of H and H+ in the upper atmosphere. Garcia Munoz (2007) developed the only model to address the presence of O and C+ in the thermosphere (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2004; Linsky et al., 2010). This model is otherwise similar to Yelle (2004), but it includes the photochemistry of heavy ions, atoms, molecules, and molecular ions. It also extends to higher altitudes, and includes the effect of substellar tidal forces and stellar wind, albeit in an approximate manner. Koskinen et al. (2007a,b) developed a three-dimensional model for the thermospheres of EGPs at wide orbits. They pointed out that the atmospheres of close-in EGPs do not escape hydrodynamically unless they receive enough stellar XUV energy to dissociate molecules in the EUV heating layer below the exobase. Although their results are limited to the specific case of H2, they can be generalized as follows. The most important molecules H2 (through the formation of H3+), CO, H2O, and CH4 act as strong infrared coolants in the thermosphere. High temperatures and rapid escape are only possible once these molecules are dissociated. Koskinen et al. (2007b) showed that H2 dissociates in the thermosphere of a Jupiter-type planet orbiting a Sun-like star within 0.2AU. Once H2 dissociates, it is reasonable to assume that other molecules dissociate too. At this point the pressure scale height is enhanced by a factor of ∼10 when H becomes the dominant species in the thermosphere and temperatures reach 10,000K. It should be noted that a composition of H and H+ with high temperatures does not guarantee that the atmosphere escapes hydrodynamically. For instance, Koskinen et al. (2009) showed that hydrodynamic escape is extremely unlikely to occur on a planet such as HD17156b because of its high mass and eccentric orbit. These types of results have implications on statistical studies that characterize the escape of planetary atmospheres by relying on the so-called energy-limited escape (e.g., Watson et al., 1981; Lecavelier des Etangs, 2007; Sanz-Forcada et al., 2010). These studies often include an efficiency factor in the mass loss rate that is based on the heating efficiency of the upper atmosphere (e.g., Lammer et al., 2009). Unless the atmosphere is escaping rapidly, the heating efficiency could be considerably larger than the fraction of energy that actually powers escape through adiabatic cooling. Under diffusion-limited escape or in the Jeans regime the energy-limited escape rate is just an upper limit and the true escape rate can be lower. Ideally, the uncertainties in the models can be limited by detailed observations of the escaping species. At present, multiple observations are only available for HD209458b, and they reveal the presence of H, O, C+, and Si2+ at high altitudes in the thermosphere (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2003, 2004; Linsky et al., 2010). Visible and infrared observations have also revealed the presence of Na, H2O, CH4, and CO2 in the lower atmosphere (Charbonneau et al., 2002; Knutson et al., 2008; Swain et al., 2009). Taken together, these observations are beginning to reveal the composition and thermal structure in the atmosphere of HD209458b. The purpose of the current paper is to characterize the density profiles of all of the detected species in the thermosphere, and to explain the presence of the heavy atoms and ions at high altitudes in the upper atmosphere. The results can be used to infer some basic properties of the atmosphere. To this end, we introduce a one-dimensional escape model for the upper atmosphere of HD209458b that includes the photochemistry of heavy atoms and ions. As pointed out above, previous models agree broadly on the qualitative nature of the thermosphere but the temperature, density, and velocity profiles predicted by them differ significantly (see Section 3.1). Some authors have argued that the density of H in the thermosphere is not sufficient to explain the observed transit depths (see Koskinen et al. (2010a) for a review), thus lending support to alternative interpretations of the observations such as the presence of energetic neutral atoms (Holström et al., 2008) or a comet-like tail of hydrogen shaped by radiation pressure (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2003). Accurate modeling of the thermosphere is required to enable better judgment between different explanations of the observations. The differences between previous models arise from different assumptions regarding heating rates and boundary conditions. In addition to modeling the density profiles of the detected heavy species, we have improved these aspects of the calculations in our work. For instance, the lower boundary conditions are constrained by results from a detailed photochemical model of the lower atmosphere (Lavvas et al., in preparation). With regard to the upper boundary conditions, we demonstrate that for HD209458b the extrapolated 'outflow' boundary conditions (e.g., Tian et al., 2005) are consistent with recent results from kinetic theory (Volkov et al., 2011a,b) as long as the upper boundary is at a sufficiently high altitude - although uncertainties regarding the interaction of the atmosphere with the stellar wind may limit the validity of both boundary conditions. We highlight the effect of heating efficiency and stellar flux on the density and temperature profiles, and constrain the likely heating rates by using photoelectron heating efficiencies based on the results of Cecchi-Pestellini et al. (2009) and our own estimates (Section 3.1). As a result we provide a robust qualitative description of the density profiles, and constrain the mean temperature and velocity profile in the thermosphere. A second paper by Koskinen et al. (2012) (Paper II) compares our results directly with the observations. 