Late Quaternary tephrostratigraphy of southern Chile and Argentina  Abstract The Southern and Austral Volcanic Zones of the Andes comprise 74 volcanic centres with known post-glacial activity. At least 21 of these have had one or more large explosive eruptions in the late Quaternary, dispersing tephra over vast areas. These tephra layers therefore have great potential as tephrochronological marker horizons in palaeoenvironmental studies in southern Chile and Argentina, a region that is particularly useful to study climate dynamics of the southern hemisphere. However, to date tephrochronology has rarely been fully utilised in this region as a correlation and dating tool. Here we review the existing post-glacial tephrostratigraphic record of the Southern and Austral Volcanic Zones, and compile a database of known occurrences of tephra from these volcanoes in ice and lacustrine, marine, peat, and cave sediment records. We address the inconsistencies in and revisions of the tephrostratigraphies presented in prior literature, and discuss the challenges in correlating tephras and the limitations of the tephrostratigraphic record in this area. This study highlights the many gaps that still exist in our knowledge of the eruptive histories of these volcanoes, but also reveals the largely under-utilised potential of tephra as a correlation tool in this region. This is exemplified by the severe lack of adequate geochemical analysis of tephra layers preserved in many lacustrine and peat sediment sections, which are particularly important tephrostratigraphic records in southern Chile and Argentina due to the paucity of surface preservation. Highlights • Review of the post-glacial tephrostratigraphy in southern Chile/Argentina. • Identify 29 potential regional marker tephra units from 21 volcanoes. • Present database of tephra occurrences in palaeoenvironment records from the region. • Describe challenges in correlation of tephra units in the region. • The tephrochronological potential of sediment sections is significantly underused.  Introduction Tephrochronology is widely employed as a stratigraphic correlation tool in a broad range of disciplines, including (but not limited to) archaeology (e.g., Prieto et al., 2013; Riede and Thastrup, 2013), palaeoclimatology (e.g., Davies et al., 2012; Elbert et al., 2013), palaeoecology (e.g., Buckland et al., 1980; McCulloch and Davies, 2001), palaeogeomorphology (e.g., Stern et al., 2011; Dugmore and Newton, 2012), and volcanology (e.g., Shane, 2000; Watt et al., 2011). This technique is based on the principle that tephra layers represent (quasi-)isochronous marker horizons, because they are the result of direct fallout of volcanic ash from the atmosphere during and immediately after volcanic eruptions, which are generally short-lived in geological terms. The identification and correlation of synchronous volcanic ash (tephra) layers over a vast geographical area and in different environmental settings, e.g., terrestrial outcrops and lacustrine and marine sediment cores, has great potential for synchronising and dating sequences of events recorded in diverse locations (cf. review by Lowe (2011)). In volcanology, characterisation of tephra deposits from a specific source (either a known volcano or particular eruptive event) over a wide area helps constraining the frequency-magnitude relationships of explosive eruptions from the source volcanoes. Constraints on eruptive frequency and magnitude are crucial for volcanic hazard assessment and for understanding the moderate- to long-term evolution of volcanic systems in relation to their tectonic setting. Study of distal volcanic ash from large explosive eruptions is important in the reconstruction of eruptive parameters (e.g., erupted volume and eruption column height), as well as in understanding the potential environmental impacts of explosive eruptions beyond the local scale. In other disciplines, such as archaeology and palaeoclimatology, tephra layers are invaluable geochronological markers, sometimes helping to date sequences where other geochronological methods might fail. In lacustrine and marine settings, age models for sediment cores spanning several (or tens of) millennia often rely heavily on a set of radiocarbon ages, which can be difficult to calibrate due to reservoir effects (e.g., Yu et al., 2007). Such cores require well-constrained age models as they are commonly used to investigate the palaeoenvironmental record (e.g., Kilian and Lamy, 2012), regional earthquake history (e.g., Bertrand et al., 2008a), etc. If tephra horizons are found and assigned to a particular well-dated volcanic event, these can enable more accurate age models of the sediment cores. For tephrochronology to be used to its maximum potential and to validate the correlation of tephra layers in different settings as geochronological markers, a thorough characterisation of tephra layers encountered in different locations is essential. Tephra layers are preferably characterised in terms of glass (or sometimes whole-rock) chemical composition, mineral assemblage and composition, componentry, and physical characteristics such as colour, grain size, and texture, to aid correlations (Lowe, 2011). However, correlations sometimes only rely on a rough age correspondence between distinctive tephra layers in different sections (e.g., Abarzúa et al., 2004; Lamy et al., 2004). This may be problematic where significant age uncertainties exist and/or where multiple tephra layers occur in rather narrow time windows. Inadequate characterisation of tephra layers may lead to erroneous correlations, especially in areas with many active and thus potential source volcanoes. Miscorrelations can have serious implications for derived age models, e.g., in palaeoenvironment reconstructions. In this paper, we present a critical review of the late Quaternary tephrostratigraphic record as it is known from scientific literature for the Andean Southern and Austral Volcanic Zones, which span the approximate latitude range 33-55°S (Fig. 1). They comprise 74 volcanic centres thought to have been active during post-glacial times (Global Volcanism Program, GVP, http://volcano.si.edu/; Large Magnitude Explosive Eruptions database (LaMEVE), http://www.bgs.ac.uk/vogripa; Crosweller et al., 2012; Siebert et al., 2010), ranging from clusters of (monogenetic) cones to central stratovolcanoes and large volcanic complexes. They include some of the most historically active volcanoes of the Andes, such as Villarrica and Llaima, both of which have erupted several times per decade in recent history, with relatively limited regional impact (Dzierma and Wehrmann, 2010; Van Daele et al., in press). They also include several volcanoes that have had historical Plinian-style eruptions with significant regional or even hemispheric impact, e.g., the 1932 Cerro Azul (Quizapu; Hildreth and Drake, 1992), 1991 Cerro Hudson (Wilson et al., 2012), 2008 Chaitén (Watt et al., 2009) and 2011 Puyehue-Cordón Caulle (Collini et al., 2013) events. This region is of particular interest not only for its frequent volcanic activity, but also because of the potential for investigating the (pre-)historical regional record of large earthquakes (similar to the 1960 Mw 9.5 Valdivia earthquake) using turbidite deposits in lakes (Arnaud et al., 2006; Moernaut et al., 2007; Bertrand et al., 2008a). In addition to being volcanically and tectonically active, southern South America is the only landmass to cross the southern westerly wind belt, which is a significant control on global ocean circulation and so climate (Kilian and Lamy, 2012). High-resolution palaeoenvironmental archives have therefore been sought from the many fjords, lakes, and areas of peatland in southern Chile and Argentina (Kilian and Lamy, 2012). The predominantly post-glacial records obtained have provided significant insights into, for example, interhemispheric climatic linkages and the dynamics of both Holocene climate and the regional deglaciation (e.g., Lamy et al., 2010; Moreno et al., 2012; Hall et al., 2013). At the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; ca 25-16 ka in the study region; Hulton et al., 2002; Glasser et al., 2008; Kaplan et al., 2008) the Southern and Austral Volcanic Zones were largely glaciated, so this region is a good case study to investigate the potential coupling between deglaciation and volcanism, namely a possible increase in eruption rates during deglaciation and early post-glacial times (Huybers and Langmuir, 2009; Watt et al., 2013a). We present the known eruptive histories of the individual volcanic centres in the study area, and we list all the known tephra occurrences in published palaeoenvironment records, attributed to specific eruptive events wherever possible. The aim is to provide a regional stratigraphic framework (in the Supplementary Information) that can be used as a reference for tephrochronological correlations in southern Chile and Argentina. It is important to note that the record presented here is incomplete, because the majority of the volcanoes in the study area are still poorly studied, or results from existing field studies are difficult to access. As the eruptive histories of specific volcanoes become better known, or additional lithological data from sediment cores becomes available, new information could easily be integrated into this record. 