How does wind farm performance decline with age?  Abstract Ageing is a fact of life. Just as with conventional forms of power generation, the energy produced by a wind farm gradually decreases over its lifetime, perhaps due to falling availability, aerodynamic performance or conversion efficiency. Understanding these factors is however complicated by the highly variable availability of the wind. This paper reveals the rate of ageing of a national fleet of wind turbines using free public data for the actual and theoretical ideal load factors from the UK's 282 wind farms. Actual load factors are recorded monthly for the period of 2002-2012, covering 1686 farm-years of operation. Ideal load factors are derived from a high resolution wind resource assessment made using NASA data to estimate the hourly wind speed at the location and hub height of each wind farm, accounting for the particular models of turbine installed. By accounting for individual site conditions we confirm that load factors do decline with age, at a similar rate to other rotating machinery. Wind turbines are found to lose 1.6 ± 0.2% of their output per year, with average load factors declining from 28.5% when new to 21% at age 19. This trend is consistent for different generations of turbine design and individual wind farms. This level of degradation reduces a wind farm's output by 12% over a twenty year lifetime, increasing the levelised cost of electricity by 9%. Graphical abstract Highlights: • The output of 282 wind farms is accurately estimated using public wind speed data. • Correcting for variability in the weather allows wind turbine ageing to be studied. • Onshore wind farm output falls 16% a decade, possibly due to availability and wear. • Performance decline with age is seen in all farms and all generations of turbines. • Decreasing output over a farm's life increases the levelised cost of electricity.  Introduction Ageing is a fact of life. Its effects are inevitable for all kinds of machinery, reducing the efficiency, output and availability of steam and gas turbines, solar PV modules, batteries and automobiles alike. Previous work on wind turbines has considered the reliability of individual components and the effect of ageing on availability, but any impact on the energy production of turbines or farms has not been widely reported. If load factors (also known as capacity factors) decrease significantly with age, wind farms will produce a lower cumulative lifetime output, increasing the levelised cost of electricity from the plants. If the rate of degradation were too great, it could become worthwhile to prematurely replace the turbines with new models, implying that the economic life of the turbine was shorter than its technical life, further increasing its cost. This could have significant policy implications for the desirability of investing in wind power, as argued in a recent report by Hughes for the Renewable Energy Foundation (REF) [1]. That report suggested that the load factors of wind farms in the UK have declined by 5-13% per year, normalising for month-by-month variations in wind speeds. These findings could represent a significant hurdle for the wind industry, but they require replication. Several factors can confound the relationship between age and observed output in a fleet of wind farms, given that a turbine's output is dependent on wind speeds at its site and the efficiency with which it captures the energy in that wind. For example, if wind speeds have fallen slightly over time, farms would have lower load factors in recent months, when they were at their oldest, giving a spurious correlation between age and poor performance. If improvements in design increase a turbine's output relative to capacity (its power coefficient) then newer turbines (of the improved design) will have higher load factors than old turbines, so that turbine output appears to decline with age, when really it improves with newer generations. On the other hand, if the best (windiest) sites were occupied first, then old farms could have higher load factors than new ones built on inferior sites, so that turbines would appear to improve with age. This paper uses public domain data to infer the hour-by-hour wind speeds at the site of every wind farm in the UK, and the power curve for each farm's model of turbine to estimate the output that they would ideally produce. This technique corrects for the confounding factors (wind patterns, turbine model and site quality), and validates well for farms that report their half-hourly output to National Grid. Simulated ideal outputs are compared with actual monthly load factors from a large portion of the UK's fleet over the last decade (282 wind farms, 4.5 GW, 53 TWh), yielding the normalised performance of each wind farm accounting for its wind resource availability, and a set of weather-corrected load factors which reveal the effects of ageing. We measure the level of age-related degradation at the national level, accounting for the vintage of turbine and local site conditions at each wind farm. We test different generations of technology and individual wind farms to confirm that specific units experienced similar declines in performance. We find the ageing effect to be present, but much smaller than predicted by Hughes, in line with experience of other rotating machinery. The specific causes of this performance loss and their relative contribution are not considered in this paper, although an overview of potential reasons is given in the discussion and conclusions. Due to the amount of data and processing required for this study we provide online supplementary material which documents our sources and their validation in greater depth, along with downloadable datasets of UK wind farms and their energy output histories. 