Dual-chamber measurements of δ13C of soil-respired CO2 partitioned using a field-based three end-member model  Abstract The contribution of old soil C (SOM) to total soil respiration (RS) in forest has been a crucial topic in global change research, but remains uncertain. Isotopic methods, such as natural variations in carbon isotope composition (δ13C) of soil respiration, are more frequently being applied, and show promise in separating heterotrophic and autotrophic contributions to RS. However, natural and artificial modification of δ13CRs can cause isotopic disequilibria in the soil-atmosphere system generating a mismatch between what is usually measured and what process-based models will predict. Here we report the partitioning of the soil surface CO2 flux in a warm Mediterranean forest into components derived from root, litter/humus, and SOM sources using a new, three end-member mixing model, and compare this with the conventional partitioning into autotrophic and heterotrophic components. The three end-member mixing model takes into account both the discrimination during CO2 respiration/decomposition of the three components, as well as the fractions of their CO2 fluxes integrated over the total soil profile mass. In addition, we used a novel dual-chamber technique to ensure that δ13CRs was subjected to minimal artefacts during measurement. We observed that by using measured soil surface CO2 concentrations as a baseline level for the dual-chamber operation, it was possible to achieve and monitor the necessary conservation of the soil CO2 steady-state diffusion conditions during the measurements, without using permanent collars inserted deeply into the soil. When RS (8.64 g CO2 m2 d-1) was partitioned into two components, the mean autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration was 56 and 44%, respectively. When RS was partitioned using the three-way model, however, roots, litter/humus, and SOM contributed 30, 33, and 37% of the total flux. Our results confirm that to improve the estimates of the partitioning method, it is important to distinguish the fractional contribution of the long-term SOM-derived flux from younger and more labile sources. Highlights ► Natural variations in carbon isotope composition (δ13C) of soil respiration. ► Dual-chamber technique to ensure that δ13CRs is subjected to minimal artefacts during measurement. ► Three end-member mixing model for partitioning the soil surface CO2 flux. ► Fractional contribution of the long-term SOM-derived flux from younger and more labile sources.  Introduction Natural variations in carbon isotope composition (δ13C) provide a powerful tool for studying C dynamics in the soil-plant-atmosphere system (Hanson et al., 2000; Ehleringer et al., 2000; Bowling et al., 2008), including partitioning of the autotrophic and heterotrophic components of the surface flux, RS. Reliably estimating the heterotrophic component of RS is crucial for the characterisation of an ecosystem's net C balance. The difference between the C fluxes arising from soil heterotrophic respiration and net primary production defines an ecosystem's net exchange of C, which determines if the system is a net source of, or sink for, atmospheric CO2. It is therefore crucial to estimate the contributions of individual components of RS, e.g., CO2 derived from autotrophic root respiration or from heterotrophic respiration of microbes decomposing recent litter, or old soil organic matter (SOM). Normally, three-way partitioning can be achieved only using two isotopes. Here we report a new approach that combines δ13C measurements of CO2 derived from SOM, roots and litter with the corresponding mass-dependent CO2 fluxes to estimate their relative and absolute contributions to RS. Generally, chemical and biochemical processes accumulate the lighter isotope in the product, leaving the substrate enriched in the heavier isotope (Högberg and Ekblad, 1996). This fractionation can differ among biological processes. Recently, Werth and Kuzyakov (2010) reviewed 13C/12C fractionations by biotic processes occurring at the root-microbe-soil interface. They reported that organic C in the root tissues of C3 vegetation are generally 13C-enriched by 1.2 ± 0.6‰ compared with the aboveground tissues, whereas the CO2 respired by roots is depleted by 2.1 ± 2.6‰, compared with root organic C. Under C3 vegetation, microbial CO2 is enriched by 0.7 ± 2.8‰ in comparison to the C in SOM. The causes of δ13C variation in respired CO2 can be summarised as: (i) isotopic effects during the metabolic synthesis of secondary compounds (e.g., lipids, lignin, cellulose); (ii) variation in photosynthetic discrimination against 13C combined with temporal lags in the movement of photosynthates through plant and soil pools; (iii) shifts in microbial δ13C due to anaplerotic CO2 fixation; (iv) preferential use of certain respiratory substrates by microbes; and (v) kinetic fractionation of 13C/12C during microbial respiration (Tu and Dawson, 2005; Bowling et al., 2008). Most of the C in SOM derives from the microbial degradation of plant litter which consists of polysaccharides and more depleted lignin 13C. Since easily decomposable substances like glucose or sucrose are preferentially decomposed by microbes, the balance between litter-derived compounds retained in the soil has a direct impact, via isotopic mass balance, on the net δ13C of SOM (Cotrufo et al., 2005). However, the δ13C of SOM in forest ecosystems generally increases (i.e., becomes more negative) with soil depth by approximately 1-3‰ relative to that of the litter layer (Nadelhoffer and Fry, 1988). The reasons for this are still unclear (Boström et al., 2007). Possible explanations include the accumulated influence of isotopic discrimination during selective microbial decomposition of specific substrates within the SOM (Nadelhoffer and Fry, 1988; Buchmann et al., 1997; Lin et al., 1999), and more importantly by the increased contribution of microbially derived C to SOM with depth (Ehleringer et al., 2000; Högberg et al., 2005). The use of δ13C for partitioning the contribution of different sources of RS has the advantage of permitting in situ measurements with minimal disturbance to soil and roots (Hanson et al., 2000; Paterson et al., 2009). Its success relies on distinguishing small differences in δ13C of CO2 produced by autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration, and it is frequently applied in combination with incubation of excised roots, litter, and SOM samples. Studies of variations in δ13C of RS commonly use mass balance equations to estimate the proportions of two (and rarely more than two) C sources that contribute to the soil surface CO2 flux (Lin et al., 1999; Ngao et al., 2005; Sakata et al., 2007; Millard et al., 2010). Isotopic linear mixing models partition the contributions of n + 1 sources, when n isotopically distinct tracers (e.g., δ13C, δ15N, δ18O) are used as end-members, and assume that source signatures that fall closest to that of the mixture provide the greatest contribution. Factors such as the seasonal variability of the photosynthetic discrimination, as well as environmental conditions such as soil temperature and soil moisture, can vary the differences in δ13C between CO2 derived from different C pools, and are therefore important constraints on the partitioning method (Phillips and Gregg, 2001; Trumbore, 2006). The isotopic approach also needs to overcome uncertainties associated with the binary diffusion of 12CO2 and 13CO2 through the soil's gas-filled pore space and across the soil-air interface. Generally, the slower molecular diffusivity of 13CO2 can induce CO2 in bulk soil to be up to 4.4‰ more enriched in 13C than that released at the soil surface δ13CRs (Amundson et al., 1998; Cerling et al., 1991). Some complications in the interpretation of diffusive flux profiles were discussed by Koehler et al. (2010). Transient conditions in diffusive flux profiles can be caused by time-varying respiratory CO2 production (Moyes et al., 2010). In addition, changes in atmospheric pressure and wind effects (advection) can alter the diffusion of soil CO2 (Dudziak and Halas, 1996), From a diffusion experiment involving artificial soil and CO2 source, Kayler et al. (2008) concluded that non-steady-state effects must be considered in field investigations of δ13CRs in soils. However, the correct interpretation of δ13CRs data is likely determined by the possibility of using measuring techniques which avoid perturbation of the steady-state diffusion conditions of respiration. Soil surface chambers are the most commonly used technique to measure δ13CRs. Such approaches include: (i) purging of atmospheric δ13C-CO2 in the chamber headspace (Flanagan et al., 1996; Buchmann and Ehleringer, 1998), (ii) long-term chamber deployment for δ13CRs equilibration (Mora and Raich, 2007), and (iii) the maintenance of chamber headspace at atmospheric CO2 concentration, [CO2] (Subke et al., 2004a; Bertolini et al., 2006; Midwood et al., 2008). However, several decades of experience with chamber-based measurements have revealed numerous potential sources of errors in measuring soil respiration (Davidson et al., 2002). Some recent studies on the use of closed- and open-chamber systems reported evidence of perturbation of the δ13C steady-state diffusion profile and 12CO2 and 13CO2 gradients (Ohlsson et al., 2005; Nickerson and Risk, 2009; Gamnitzer et al., 2011). In addition, the installation of soil collars several centimetres into the soil, to minimize CO2 leakage in and out of the chamber (Hutchinson and Livingston, 2001), has raised concerns regarding the possibility of measuring δ13CRs beyond the collar insertion depth (Kayler et al., 2008), and their utility in soil respiration partitioning studies (Heinemeyer et al., 2011). To address these concerns, we developed and used a dual-chamber technique to minimize the artefacts and biases in chamber-based measurements of δ13CRs. In addition, we aimed to partition the soil surface CO2 flux into its components derived from root, litter/humus, and SOM sources and, alternatively, into autotrophic and heterotrophic components. 