Surface waves on Saturn's magnetopause  Abstract Waves on the surface of a planetary magnetopause promote energy transport into the magnetosphere, representing an important aspect of solar wind-magnetosphere coupling. At Saturn's magnetopause it has been proposed that growth of the Kelvin-Helmholtz (K-H) instability produces greater wave activity on the dawn side of the surface than on the dusk side. We test this hypothesis using data taken by the Cassini spacecraft during crossings of Saturn's magnetopause. Surface orientation perturbations are primarily controlled by the local magnetospheric magnetic field orientation, and are generally greater at dusk than at dawn. 53% of all crossings were part of a sequence of regular oscillations arising in consecutive surface normals that is strong evidence for tailward propagating surface waves, with no detectable local time asymmetry in this phenomenon. We estimate the dominant wave period to be ∼5h at dawn and ∼3h at dusk. The role played by the magnetospheric magnetic field, tailward wave propagation, and the dawn-dusk difference in wave period suggests that K-H instability is a major wave driving mechanism. Using linear K-H theory we estimate the dominant wavelength to be ∼10 Saturn radii (RS) and amplitude to be ∼1 RS at both dawn and dusk, giving propagation speeds of ∼30 and ∼50kms-1 at dawn and dusk, respectively. The lack of the hypothesized dawn-dusk asymmetry in wave activity demonstrates that we need to revise our understanding of the growth of the K-H instability at Saturn's magnetopause, which will have implications for the study of other planetary magnetospheres. Highlights ► Surface waves on a planetary magnetopause transport energy into the magnetosphere. ► Differences in the level of wave activity across Saturn's magnetopause has been predicted. ► Kelvin-Helmholtz waves often form on Saturn's magnetopause surface. ► There is no evidence for the predicted difference across the surface. ► We need to revise our understanding of surface waves on Saturn's magnetopause.  Introduction A planetary magnetosphere results from the interaction between the solar wind and a magnetized planet, producing a cavity around the planet that effectively shields it from the solar wind flow. The boundary of a magnetosphere is referred to as its magnetopause, and is often the site of transport of solar wind energy into the system. Waves on the surface of a planetary magnetopause are one of the processes that promotes this energy transport. Our understanding of this phenomenon is mainly based on spacecraft data taken at the boundary of Earth's magnetosphere, which is understandably the most-observed planetary magnetopause (see the review by de Keyser et al. (2005) and references therein). Substantial evidence for surface waves on Earth's magnetopause has been reported (e.g. Aubry et al., 1971) and the driving mechanisms responsible for these waves include solar wind pressure pulses (Song et al., 1988; Sibeck, 1990), growth of the Kelvin-Helmholtz (K-H) instability (Owen et al., 2004; Foullon et al., 2008; Eriksson et al., 2009), and magnetic reconnection (Song et al., 1988). Resolving the wave driving mechanism is often difficult, but is important because of the insight it provides into the nature of the transport of momentum and energy between the solar wind and the magnetosphere. Saturn's magnetosphere is significantly different from Earth's in many respects (see the reviews by Gombosi et al. (2009) and Mitchell et al. (2009)). In terms of the phenomenon of magnetopause surface waves, Saturn's magnetosphere is a natural laboratory in which we can examine one of the most widely studied wave driving mechanisms: The growth of the K-H instability. This instability can grow at an interface between two fluids (e.g. a planetary magnetopause (Dungey, 1955)), particularly under high flow shear conditions. A seed perturbation of a K-H unstable interface will grow with time, rather than be suppressed, leading to surface waves in the linear phase of the instability, and complex boundary vortices in the subsequent nonlinear phase. Growth of the K-H instability at Earth's magnetopause has been the subject of much research attention, with spacecraft data revealing evidence for K-H vortices associated with plasma mixing and local magnetic reconnection (Fairfield et al., 2000; Nikutowski et al., 2002; Hasegawa et al., 2004, 2006, 2009; Nykyri et al., 2006; Nishino et al., 2011). One of the principal differences between the magnetospheres of Earth and Saturn is that plasma in Saturn's magnetosphere circulates in the sense of planetary rotation throughout the dayside magnetosphere (Thomsen et al., 2010), whereas at Earth such plasma motion is confined to the inner magnetosphere. Consequently, although it is subject to large temporal and spatial variability, the shear between the flow of magnetosheath solar wind plasma and the flow of magnetospheric plasma is significantly greater on the dawn side of Saturn's magnetopause than on the dusk side. This variation in the flow shear across Saturn's magnetopause with local time is expected to lead to a generally K-H unstable boundary on the dawn side and a generally K-H stable boundary on the dusk side, producing greater boundary perturbations (waves and vortices) at dawn than at dusk (Galopeau et al., 1995). This plausible expectation has featured in theories of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling at Saturn (Galopeau et al., 1995; Sittler et al., 2006). However, this prediction of a local time asymmetry in the K-H instability of Saturn's magnetopause has not been previously tested. Two initial studies of the orientation of the magnetopause surface, each based on data returned by the Cassini Saturn orbiter during magnetopause crossings that occurred in an interval of a few days, have revealed evidence for wave activity on both the dawn side and on the dusk side (Masters et al., 2009; Cutler et al., 2011). In both these cases the K-H instability was found to be a plausible driver of the identified waves, with both sets of waves propagating tailward. We note that although this tailward propagation was correctly concluded by Masters et al. (2009) in their analysis of the dawn side waves the presented analysis results suggest sunward propagation instead, due to a discrepancy between the data and the text. Another region of interest concerning the predicted dawn-dusk asymmetry in magnetopause K-H instability is Saturn's Low-Latitude Boundary Layer (LLBL). This quasi-permanent layer lies adjacent to, and planetward of, the magnetopause at low latitudes, resulting from the transport of solar wind plasma into the magnetosphere (McAndrews, 2007; Masters et al., 2011a, 2011b). If present, a strong dawn-dusk asymmetry in magnetopause K-H instability could produce a related asymmetry in the properties (e.g. thickness) of the LLBL, since K-H instability can facilitate the cross-magnetopause plasma transport that creates the layer (see the review by Sibeck (1999) and references therein). However, a recent examination of Saturn's LLBL was not able to detect any clear dawn-dusk difference in the thickness of the layer (Masters et al., 2011a), further questioning whether the hypothesized dawn-dusk asymmetry in magnetopause K-H instability is present. In addition, Saturn's LLBL represents an intermediate plasma regime that will affect the K-H stability of the magnetopause, as well as creating an additional interface that could also become unstable: The inner (planetward) edge of the LLBL. Since plasma flow in Saturn's LLBL is poorly understood at present it is not possible to accurately predict how the presence of the layer affects the hypothesized magnetopause K-H instability asymmetry; however, a Cassini encounter with a K-H vortex has been identified on the inner edge of the LLBL (Masters et al., 2010), implying that this interface may be typically more K-H unstable than the magnetopause (e.g. Ogilvie and Fitzenreiter, 1989). As well as these observational studies, magnetohydrodynamic simulations of Saturn's magnetosphere have been carried out in which waves and vortices form on the magnetopause (Fukazawa et al., 2007a, b; Walker et al., 2011). The perturbations of the magnetopause surface in these simulations are consistent with a K-H instability driving mechanism, and an important result of these studies is that simulated waves and vortices can form on both the dawn and dusk sides, with the orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field being an important controlling factor. Recent hybrid simulations have drawn attention to the importance of the growth of K-H instability at Saturn's magnetopause for mass transfer across the boundary, which can influence magnetospheric dynamics (Delamere et al., 2011). The sum of these Cassini-era studies of Saturn's magnetopause suggest that we need to test the prediction of a dawn-dusk asymmetry in the K-H instability of Saturn's magnetopause using spacecraft observations. Additional magnetopause studies based on Cassini observations have confirmed an aspect of Saturn's magnetopause dynamics that must also be considered when investigating boundary dynamics. The mysterious, persistent modulation of Saturn's magnetospheric environment at approximately the period of planetary rotation (∼10.75h, see the review by Mitchell et al. (2009)) leads to a quasi-periodic modulation of the total pressure adjacent to the magnetopause in Saturn's outer magnetosphere at a similar period (hereafter referred to as the "magnetospheric period"). This leads to an oscillation of the magnetopause with an estimated typical amplitude of ∼1.2 Saturn radii (RS; 1 RS=60,268km) (Clarke et al., 2006, 2010). This effect has been interpreted as a displacement of the boundary on a large-scale (with respect to the scale of the dayside magnetopause), which is not expected to produce perturbations of the surface orientation as great as those reported by recent surface wave case studies (Masters et al., 2009; Cutler et al., 2011). In this paper we test the hypothesized dawn-dusk asymmetry in the K-H instability of Saturn's magnetopause for the first time by assessing the extent of surface wave activity using data taken by the Cassini spacecraft during 520 magnetopause crossings. Although we find evidence for significant perturbations of the magnetopause surface orientation and surface wave activity, and that growth of the K-H instability is a major driver of these surface perturbations, we find no clear evidence for the hypothesized dawn-dusk asymmetry. 