Halide doping effects on transparent conducting oxides formed by aerosol assisted chemical vapour deposition  Abstract We report on the effect of halide doping on the Aerosol-assisted Chemical Vapour Deposition of tin oxide. Specifically, the importance of precursor interactions is highlighted. A halide exchange reaction involving part substitution of the tin precursor is believed to occur in the solvent; the complex acting as a marker for improved films with improved transparent-conducting properties. Precursor mixtures of butyltin trichloride and potassium halide (X=F, Cl, Br, I) in propan-2-ol were deposited at a substrate temperature of 450°C using air carrier gas. Hall Effect results indicate that fluorine gave the best performing n-type transparent conducting thin films that exhibited high optical transparency (>80% at 550nm) and resistivity values of 4.9×10-4Ω.cm, with charge carrier density and carrier mobility values of 8.85×1020cm-3 and 15cm3/V.s respectively. Such parameters yield high figures of merit. Highlights ► Halide-doped tin oxide films were grown on glass using AACVD. ► Fluorine is confirmed as the most effective dopant for TCO applications. ► A halide exchange process resulting in a direct tin-dopant bond in the precursor. ► This structure is thought a marker to higher-performing films.  Introduction Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) are a class of multifunctional material which demonstrate both electrical conductivity and optical transparency over visible light wavelengths. This is made possible due to their intrinsic semiconducting nature and wide bandgap (>3.2eV) respectively [1,2]. The coincidence of two highly useful physical properties means that such materials find use in diverse roles such as flat panel displays and solar cell applications [2-4]. Tin oxide (SnO2) based TCOs are increasingly used due to their impressive TCO properties and their relative inexpense as compared to the traditional alternative; Indium-Tin-Oxide (ITO) [5]. The high performance properties are due to the ability to dope the SnO2 framework, enhancing the intrinsic n-type semiconducting properties by an order of magnitude or more [1]. The best SnO2 dopant to date has been fluorine (FTO). It introduces an extra charge carrier into the system per dopant ion; its effectiveness attributed to the ease with which it substitutes for oxygen within the SnO2 framework. Doping with fluorine also introduces donor levels localised to the conduction band, so improving the n-type electrical properties [1,3]. Since the integrity of the bandgap is largely preserved, optical transparency properties are also maintained which allows the concurrence of two normally conflicting physical phenomena. Aerosol-assisted Chemical Vapour Deposition (AACVD) is a widely used thin film preparation. The technique involves the transport of precursors within a vapourised solvent over a heated substrate, whereby the precursors effect thin film formation [6-8]. Doped-SnO2 formation in AACVD requires the presence of tin, oxygen and dopant sources, delivered either together within the same solution or from separate solutions. It has been found that the choice of precursor components and reactions prior to deposition have a marked effect on the resultant TCO properties [9]. FTO and other doped-SnO2 materials have also been deposited using atmospheric-pressure CVD (APCVD), spray pyrolysis, sol-gel dip coating and sputtering [5,10-12]. The aim of this paper is thus to investigate the effects of halide dopants on the TCO properties of SnO2. Furthermore, the effects of these dopants on the general precursor chemistry will also be investigated. The results reinforce the position of fluorine as the best dopant and yield insight into the interaction between precursor components prior to thin film deposition; namely that of a halide exchange reaction. 