Human RPE Stem Cells Grown into Polarized RPE Monolayers on a Polyester Matrix Are Maintained after Grafting into Rabbit Subretinal Space  Summary Transplantation of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is being developed as a cell-replacement therapy for age-related macular degeneration. Human embryonic stem cell (hESC) and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived RPE are currently translating toward clinic. We introduce the adult human RPE stem cell (hRPESC) as an alternative RPE source. Polarized monolayers of adult hRPESC-derived RPE grown on polyester (PET) membranes had near-native characteristics. Trephined pieces of RPE monolayers on PET were transplanted subretinally in the rabbit, a large-eyed animal model. After 4 days, retinal edema was observed above the implant, detected by spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and fundoscopy. At 1 week, retinal atrophy overlying the fetal or adult transplant was observed, remaining stable thereafter. Histology obtained 4 weeks after implantation confirmed a continuous polarized human RPE monolayer on PET. Taken together, the xeno-RPE survived with retained characteristics in the subretinal space. These experiments support that adult hRPESC-derived RPE are a potential source for transplantation therapies. Graphical Abstract Highlights • Adult hRPESC-derived RPE had comparable in vitro characteristics to fetal hRPE • hRPE monolayers survived 4 weeks on PET carriers under the rabbit retina • Better xenograft survival may be due to the maintained hRPE cell polarity • Atrophy of the retina overlaying the hRPE xenograft remains a future challenge Stanzel et al. have transplanted polarized monolayers of human retinal pigment epithelium (hRPE) grown on polyester membranes derived from adult hRPE stem cells or fetal tissue under the rabbit retina. The xeno-RPE survived 4 weeks with retained cell polarity characteristics in the subretinal space. These experiments support that adult hRPESC-derived RPE are a potential source for transplantation therapies.  Introduction The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is a cellular monolayer between the retina and the underlying choroidal vasculature. The RPE participates actively in the visual process, notably by supporting the diurnal replenishment of the photoreceptors (Strauss, 2005). RPE dysfunction significantly contributes to the pathophysiology of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of blindness (Lim et al., 2012). There are currently no disease-altering therapies available for the vast majority (over 85%) of AMD patients that suffer from the dry form of the disease, which is characterized by extracellular deposits termed drusen beneath the RPE and subsequent RPE atrophy in the macula. The remaining approximately 15% of patients have wet AMD, in which neovascularization invades from the choroid; for these patients, repeated intravitreal injections with antiangiogenic drugs offer a highly effective, albeit palliative, treatment (Singer et al., 2012). Replacement of dysfunctional submacular RPE with a cell-based therapeutic agent represents a potentially curative treatment strategy (Binder et al., 2007). Some previous attempts in patients have been shown to improve vision, but most were limited by immune reactions, surgical complications, late-stage disease, or lack of an adequate RPE cell source (Stanzel and Holz, 2012). Translocation of an autologous patch of RPE/choroid remains clinically the most popular approach, because some patients benefit from the procedure, despite its high complication rates (van Zeeburg et al., 2012). With the development of RPE differentiation protocols from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) (Hirami et al., 2009; Klimanskaya et al., 2004), RPE transplantation has experienced a powerful renaissance, as scientists and clinicians envision an unlimited supply of RPE for transplantation. However, much is still not understood with regard to the physiology of stem-cell-derived RPE (Liao et al., 2010) and transplantation into patients is in the early stages. Pilot data from a phase I/II trial (NCT01226628 and NCT01344993) with a suspension of hESC-derived RPE injected in patients with dry AMD or Stargardt's disease suggest a favorable safety profile and some limited improvement in vision (Schwartz et al., 2012); further dose-escalation in this multicenter study is on-going. This is encouraging, given that prior studies using RPE cell suspensions showed they failed to survive or function on aged submacular Bruch's membrane (Sugino et al., 2011) and are more likely to be rejected than are RPE monolayers (Diniz et al., 2013). A cultured human RPE monolayer that exhibits the physiology of its native counterpart could be a valuable alternative to an RPE-cell suspension. This type of culture has been readily attained using fetal- or pluripotent-stem-cell-derived RPE. However, establishing such cultures from adult RPE has proven difficult and inconsistent, due to its propensity to undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition (reviewed in Burke, 2008). We have optimized culture conditions that robustly activate a subpopulation of adult human RPE stem cells (RPESC), expand, and then differentiate them into highly pure RPE monolayers that exhibit physiological features of native RPE (Blenkinsop et al., 2013; Salero et al., 2012). This protocol allows us to explore the potential of adult RPESC-derived RPE for cell-replacement therapy. To date, we do not know which cell source will turn out to be therapeutically successful, and therefore, testing all potential candidates is important. Using a cell source derived from the adult human RPE may possess several potential advantages, such as fewer ethical concerns compared to hESC and fetal human RPE (hRPE), the possibility of routine histocompatibility leukocyte antigen matching or even autologous transplantation (using a patient's own remaining healthy RPESCs) to minimize immunosuppression, reduced proliferative potential than hESCs or human iPSCs and therefore reduced tumorigenesis risk, and reduced threat of generating abnormal cell types. RPE monolayers grown on cell carriers would facilitate surgical handling and long-term functionality by substituting some or all of the functions of the aged Bruch's membrane (Binder et al., 2007). Coimplantation of differentiated RPE monolayers on a substrate has been attempted in animal models only in a few instances and with limited success (Bhatt et al., 1994; Diniz et al., 2013; Nicolini et al., 2000). Improvements would involve employing a biocompatible matrix that exhibits minimal deformation after transplantation, longer-term assessment postsurgery, and use of a large-eyed animal model for better assessment of surgical technique. We have previously reported on a method and instrumentation to deliver ultrathin rigid-elastic cell carriers (polyester [PET]) into the subretinal space (SRS) of rabbits (Stanzel et al., 2012). Here, we demonstrate this technology can be used to deliver monolayers of human RPE on permeable polyester carriers into the SRS of the rabbit. Notably, we find RPE isolated from adult cadaver donors can expand 20-fold and survive as a polarized RPE monolayer for 1 month after transplantation, therefore representing a clinically relevant RPE cell source. Transplants were followed with state-of-the-art ophthalmic imaging technology, including spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), confocal scanning-laser ophthalmoscopy (cSLO), color funduscopic photography, and histology. In addition, the influence of local and systemic immunosuppression on retinal tissue alterations following xenografting was evaluated. 