The transterminator ion flow at Venus at solar minimum  Abstract The transterminator ion flow in the Venusian ionosphere is observed at solar minimum for the first time. Such a flow, which transports ions from the day to the nightside, has been observed previously around solar maximum. At solar minimum this transport process is severely inhibited by the lower altitude of the ionopause. The observations presented were those made of the Venusian ionospheric plasma by the ASPERA-4 experiment onboard the Venus Express spacecraft, and which constitute the first extensive in-situ measurements of the plasma near solar minimum. Observations near the terminator of the energies of ions of ionospheric origin showed asymmetry between the noon and midnight sectors, which indicated an antisunward ion flow with a velocity of (2.5±1.5)kms-1. It is suggested that this ion flow contributes to maintaining the nightside ionosphere near the terminator region at solar minimum. The interpretation of the result was reinforced by observed asymmetries in the ion number counts. The observed dawn-dusk asymmetry was consistent with a nightward transport of ions while the noon-midnight observations indicated that the flow was highly variable but could contribute to the maintenance of the nightside ionosphere. Highlights ► The transterminator ion flow in the Venusian ionosphere is observed at solar minimum. ► This flow has a velocity of (2.5±1.5)kms-1. ► The occurrence of this flow is highly variable, but can be a significant source of the nightside ionosphere.  Introduction The nightside ionosphere of Venus has a dynamic and complex structure (Brace et al., 1979). To date the most extensive set of in situ observations of the ionospheric plasma were obtained by Pioneer Venus Orbiter (PVO). Although the PVO mission covered an entire solar cycle the ionospheric measurements were largely restricted to a limited period close to solar maximum between 1978 and 1980 when the PVO periapsis was at a sufficiently low altitude to allow sampling of the ionosphere. The solar flux during this period was about 200 solar flux units (sfu). These PVO observations covered all local time sectors. In the nightside ionosphere they showed that precipitating electrons could contribute only ∼25% of the plasma densities observed and that changes in ionospheric densities were much more variable than, and not correlated with, changes in the flux of precipitating electrons (Spenner et al., 1981). Observations of the flux of atomic oxygen ions across the terminator from the day to nightside showed that this ion flux was sufficient to explain the observed ion densities in the nightside ionosphere at solar maximum (Knudsen et al., 1980). The ions were assumed to follow ballistic trajectories and theoretical calculations predicted that 80% of the ions that crossed the terminator had recombined with electrons before they reached a solar zenith angle (SZA) of 110°. Only those ions that crossed the terminator at the highest altitudes reached the central region of the nightside ionosphere. A modelling study by Cravens et al. (1983) predicted that ions which crossed the terminator at altitudes below 500km recombined before reaching a SZA of 120°, whilst ions that crossed the terminator at 876km influenced the entire night sector. Taken collectively these results showed that the primary source of the nightside ionosphere was plasma transport from the dayside. The plasma flow from the subsolar region toward the nightside is primarily driven by the day-to-night pressure gradient (Knudsen et al., 1981). Knudsen et al. (1982) showed that the flow speed across the terminator was highly variable but was typically several kilometres per second. The average value of the antisunward component of the velocity in the terminator region at solar maximum increased with altitude from a few hundred metres per second at an altitude of 150km to ∼4kms-1 at 800km (Knudsen and Miller, 1992). The altitude of the ionopause in the terminator region played an important role in the total number of ions transported from the day to the nightside. Its altitude in this region was variable (Elphic et al., 1980) but was typically around 1000km (Brace et al., 1983). This variability was attributed to changes in the solar EUV flux and the solar wind dynamic pressure, the balance of which altered the ionopause altitude (Knudsen and Miller, 1992). As the ionopause moved to lower altitudes the total number of ions transported antisunward was reduced (Knudsen et al., 1981). Theoretical calculations by Brace et al. (1995) showed that the transterminator flow could transport more ions antisunward than were required to maintain the nightside ionosphere and it was suggested that some of these ions might be lost to the solar wind. Limited in situ ionospheric observations aboard PVO were made in the pre-dawn sector at low latitudes in 1992 in the declining phase of solar cycle 22 under conditions of moderate solar flux (∼120sfu). The observed ion densities in this sector were significantly larger than those that would be expected in the absence of an antisunward ion flow. This suggested that ion transport was significant in this sector (Brannon et al., 1993). The PVO observations showed that the total transterminator flux was 23% of that at solar maximum and that the largest reductions in the number of ions transported antisunward occurred at the highest altitudes (Spenner et al., 1995). The PVO mission did not include in situ observations of the Venusian ionosphere around solar minimum, however the behaviour of the ionopause was inferred from PVO radio occultation profiles, for which the temporal data coverage was less extensive than for the in situ measurements. The ionopause was at significantly lower altitudes at solar minimum than at solar maximum, typically between 200km and 300km for all SZA (Kliore and Luhmann, 1991). The radio occultation profiles from PVO also showed that the transport process was severely inhibited (Knudsen et al., 1987). Radio occultation profiles from Venera 9 and 10 observed the ionopause at higher altitudes in the terminator region at solar minimum with altitudes between 600km and 800km (Gavrik and Samoznaev, 1987). The Venusian ionosphere exhibited a number of asymmetries between the dawn and dusk sectors. Brace et al. (1982) observed that the ionopause was higher on the dawn side than at dusk due to interaction with the solar wind. Miller and Knudsen (1987) reported larger antisunward velocities within the ionosphere on the dawn side than on the dusk side above an altitude of 400km, with the pattern reversed below this altitude. The dawn-dusk asymmetry below 400km was largely attributed to photoionisation as plasma in the post-noon sector had been exposed to sunlight for longer than plasma in the pre-noon sector. The plasma flow from the dayside to the nightside was driven by the day-to-night pressure gradient, with the higher plasma densities in the post-noon sector enhancing the nightward transport of ions on the dusk side. The super-rotation of the neutral atmosphere also enhanced the ion flow on the dusk side and reduced the flow on the dawn side due to collisional interactions between the ions and the neutral species. A subsequent modelling study at the altitude of the peak density in the ionosphere (∼140km) showed that differences in the thermospheric composition between the dawn and dusk sides may also cause asymmetries in the ionosphere at these altitudes due to changes in the dominant chemical reactions (Fox and Kasprzak, 2007). Between August 2008 and October 2009 Venus Express (VEX) was in an orbit with periapsis near 86°N and an altitude between 185km and 215km with about 10min spent in the ionosphere during each orbit. Taken collectively over many orbits the in situ ionospheric measurements cover all local time sectors, with each orbit sampling the terminator region at polar latitudes. In the current study these observations are used to determine the plasma distribution near the terminator and to show that the transport process contributes to the maintenance of the nightside ionosphere close to solar minimum. 