Simulations of a vertical axis turbine in a channel  Abstract The power coefficient of a turbine increases according to the predictions from streamtube theory for sites with a confined fluid flow. Here, a vertical axis turbine (optimized for free flow) has been simulated by a two-dimensional vortex method, both in a channel and in free flow. The first part of the study concerns the numerical parameters of channel simulations. It is found that for free flow and wide channels, a large number of revolutions is required for convergence (around 100 at the optimal tip speed ratio and increasing with higher tip speed ratio), while for smaller channels, the required number of revolutions decreases. The second part analyses changes in turbine performance by the channel boundaries. The turbine performance increases when the channel width is decreased, although the results are below the predictions from streamtube theory, and this difference increases with decreasing channel width. It is also observed that the optimal tip speed ratio increases with decreasing channel width. By increasing the chord, which decreases the optimal tip speed ratio, the power coefficient can be increased somewhat. Highlights • Theory for extending a vortex model to a channel included. • The extracted power for a turbine increases with decreasing channel width. • The optimal tip speed ratio for a turbine increases with decreasing channel width. • Turbines in a channel should have larger blades than in free flow. • Wide channels require many simulated revolution for convergence.  Introduction If a site for a turbine is bounded by rigid walls, the walls will affect the character of the flow and thereby the performance of the turbine. One example is a river, where the net flow between impermeable river banks is constant. In this case, the flow boundaries increase turbine performance [1,2]. The same holds for experimental tests in wind tunnels and towing tanks etc. Another example is flow generated by tides in a river mouth. Here, the flow resistance caused by the turbines can decrease the total flow through the channel and reduce power production [3]. A final example is flow with artificial walls created in open sea. Here, the flow has the possibility to pass around the walls, and the fluid motion between the channel walls depends on the flow resistance of the turbine. This case has been studied in Refs. [4-6] and elsewhere. The present study only covers the first case, where the total flow in the channel is constant. Apart from building turbines in confined areas, the study of turbines inside a channel is also important from a simulation point of view. For simulations based on volume discretization, e.g. FEM, walls in the simulation domain are introduced. If these walls are located too close to the turbine, the computed performance will be incorrect. This article is intended to be useful both for designers of turbines in channels and for those involved with simulations of turbines. In this study, straight bladed vertical axis turbines are investigated. For a simple and robust turbine design, only turbines with a fixed blade pitch angle are studied. Vertical axis turbines are typically simulated with either streamtube models, vortex models or CFD models based on volume discretization. Since the traditional streamtube models [7,8], only work for free flow, this is not an option for channel flow. The choice therefore stands between vortex methods, which in their basic forms are best suited for free flows, and CFD models, which due to the volume discretization always are accompanied by channel effects. To study the channel effects properly, many simulations have to be performed. Therefore, a computationally efficient method is required, and vortex method simulations are generally faster than CFD models. For this reason, the vortex method is chosen for the current study. To further reduce the computational time, only 2D simulations are performed, which is a reasonably realistic model for a vertical axis turbine. 