Morphology control in co-evaporated bulk heterojunction solar cells  Abstract Bulk heterojunction solar cells made by vacuum co-evaporation of polythiophene (PTh) and fullerene (C60) are reported and the blend morphology control through donor-acceptor composition and post-situ annealing demonstrated. Co-deposited heterojunctions are shown to generate about 60% higher photocurrents than their thickness-optimized PTh/C60 planar heterojunction counterparts. Furthermore, by annealing the devices post-situ the power conversion efficiency is improved by as much as 80%. UV-vis, XRD and AFM analysis shows that the enhanced photoresponse is a result of favorable morphological development of PTh upon annealing. Annealing-induced improvement of the donor-acceptor network is demonstrated across a wide range of compositions (20-80% PTh). This illustrates that good morphology control is possible in co-evaporated polymer-fullerene blends through multiple parameters and differentiates this donor-acceptor combination from the standard small-molecule systems. Graphical abstract Highlights • Vacuum deposition of polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells is reported. • Their performance is optimized through composition as well as post-situ thermal annealing. • Annealing enhances efficiency over a wide range of D:A blend compositions (1:4-4:1). • Improved blend morphology results from favorable phase separation of the polymer. • Morphology control in the polymer blend is superior to the equivalent oligomer blends.  Introduction There is fierce competition between solution and vacuum processed organic photovoltaics [1,2]. The former relies on morphology control in polymer-fullerene blends resulting from phase separation in these systems [3-5]. The latter takes advantage of solvent-free processing allowing highly complex multi-junction architectures [6] similar to inorganic photovoltaics. The different routes have demonstrated similarly high efficiencies and both show the potential for low-cost scale-up by means of roll-to-roll processing [7,8]. In this work, we combine these approaches by co-depositing polymer-fullerene bulk heterojunctions using vacuum thermal evaporation. We show that morphology and performance can be controlled by polymer-fullerene composition ratio and post-production thermal annealing. A route to merge the useful aspects of both material systems to further enhance device efficiencies is identified, which goes beyond current small-molecule (molecular) photovoltaics. The intimate blend of donor and acceptor in a bulk heterojunction (BHJ) allows efficient exciton dissociation and charge extraction through an interpenetrated nanoscale network of the two phases [9]. This architecture has demonstrated the ability to reach 100% internal quantum efficiency [10] and has become the standard platform for fabrication of devices with state-of-the-art performance [11]. In solution processing, the two most common ways of controlling morphology are choice of solvent [12,13] and application of post-production thermal annealing [14,15]. Vacuum co-deposition of small molecules allows gradient blends and therefore precise manipulation of horizontal as well as vertical donor-acceptor composition [16,17]. Reports thus far have shown morphology control and related device efficiency improvements through in-situ [18,19] and ex-situ [20,21] thermal annealing, and evaporation additives [22]. However, achieving the level of control comparable to solution-processed BHJs remains a challenge [20,23-29]. Co-deposition often results in an almost homogeneous blend of the constituents with insufficient percolation pathways [27]. Furthermore, the ease of crystallization of small molecules is not conducive to optimum phase separation. For example, post-production thermal annealing of molecular blends leads to nucleation and growth of microcrystals [20,28-31] rather than the formation or development of nanoscale percolated networks. In this study, we combine the advantages of these two competing approaches by using naturally phase-separating polymers for well-controlled morphology in a deposition system which allows multilayer device complexity. Our group [32], and also others [33-35], have demonstrated that conjugated polymers can be thermally evaporated in vacuum (in addition, oCVD has previously been used by Borelli et al. to grow photoactive polymer films, however requiring use of an FeCl3 oxidizing agent [36]). The molecules retain their chemical composition and structure after evaporation, but decrease in molecular weight. In a following study on planar heterojunction devices we have shown that vacuum-deposited polymer without side-groups, polythiophene (PTh), exhibits enhanced molecular packing and crystallinity as compared to its soluble counterpart poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT). This resulted in significantly improved charge transport properties with relatively high hole mobilities (10-4cm2/Vs) and almost a 70% increase in power conversion efficiency [37]. Moreover, the lack of side groups accounted for a considerably longer conjugation length of the evaporated polymer. Here we demonstrate vacuum co-deposited PTh:C60 bulk heterojunction solar cells. Using different polymer-fullerene compositions we study the effect of post-production thermal annealing on the development of morphology. 