Robust VAWT control system evaluation by coupled aerodynamic and electrical simulations  Abstract A control system for a vertical axis wind turbine is presented. The electric load is determined solely from the rotational velocity and the characteristics of the turbine, thus measurements of the incoming wind speed are not required. The control system is evaluated with an aerodynamic vortex model coupled with an electrical model. Three different sets of control system parameters are tested, representing different tradeoffs between a high power absorption and achieving a fast control strategy with high stability. The simulations show that the three control strategies provide a similar power absorption as a reference strategy based on known wind speed. For dynamic simulations with fast changes in wind speed, the fast control strategies are beneficial. All control strategies are stable throughout the simulations when proper power absorption characteristics of the turbine are used. It is also shown that if peak power absorption is estimated at a too low tip speed ratio, the control strategies may inadvertently stop the turbine. Highlights • A coupled aerodynamic - electric simulation model is presented. • A control strategy for VAWT that does not require wind measurements is evaluated. • Accuracy of control strategy versus convergence speed is analysed. • The sensitivity of the control parameters is investigated.  Introduction Wind turbines are generally divided into horizontal axis wind turbines (HAWT) and vertical axis wind turbines (VAWT) [1]. This work focuses on the VAWT, which is omnidirectional, implying that a yaw mechanism is not needed. Another advantage of the VAWT is that the vertical axis allows the generator to be placed on ground, which simplifies construction and maintenance. A disadvantage of this design is that at low tip speed ratios(1)λ=rωV∞,the turbine torque is low, which implies that the generator has to be operated as a motor to start the turbine. In Eq. (1), r is the turbine radius, ω is the turbine rotational velocity and V∞ is the asymptotic wind speed. Another characteristic feature of the VAWT is the cyclic loads from the aerodynamic forces on the blades. A common design consideration is if a pitch mechanism should be included or not. The most common design is a HAWT with pitch regulation, where the turbine characteristics can be changed by varying the blade pitch angle [2]. Pitch control for a VAWT has been used to improve performance for turbines operating at low tip speed ratios by avoiding stall [3,4]. The present investigation considers turbines optimised for higher λ, where the effects of stall are much smaller. Pitch regulation of a VAWT further requires that the pitch angle is changed around the entire revolution, and such a mechanism is an additional source of mechanical failure. Furthermore, many models for pitch control of a VAWT require knowledge of the wind direction, adding the requirement for additional sensors [5,6]. For these reasons, pitch is not investigated here. Instead, this paper considers a more robust way to control the turbine, where the turbine rotational velocity is the only control parameter. The rotational velocity can be controlled via the power extracted by the generator (c.f. Fig. 1). The investigation here treats control strategies which operate without measurements of the wind speed and where the generator torque is determined from the rotational velocity of the turbine. Similar strategies have been applied for HAWTs [7], but the low aerodynamic power of VAWTs at low λ requires a separate investigation into the applicability of these models for the vertical axis case. The study of the control system is based on an aerodynamic simulation model for the turbine performance coupled with a model for the electrical system. The control system is embedded into the electrical system. This approach gives full control of the input parameters and makes a study of the performance of the complete system possible. 