The Sleipner storage site: Capillary flow modeling of a layered CO2 plume requires fractured shale barriers within the Utsira Formation  Highlights • Flow model for Sleipner with a plausible layering of CO2 plume and mass balance. • CO2 mass balance analysis for poor temperature and layer thickness constraints. • An unusual capillary flow model, not Darcy flow, results in a successful 3D model. • Low shale barrier threshold pressures indicate pervasive micro-fracturing. • Pre-CO2 fracturing hypothesis based on rapid melting of Pleistocene ice sheets. Abstract To prevent ocean acidification and mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, it is necessary to capture and store carbon dioxide. The Sleipner storage site, offshore Norway, is the world's first and largest engineered waste repository for a greenhouse gas. CO2 is separated from the Sleipner gas condensate field and stored in the pore space of the Utsira Formation, a saline aquifer approximately 1km below the surface and 200km from the coast. Statoil, the field operator, has injected almost 1Mt/yr of captured CO2 into the storage site since 1996. The buoyant CO2 plume ascended rapidly through eight thin shale barriers within the aquifer to reach the top seal in less than three years. The plume's progress has been monitored by eight seismic surveys, as well as gravimetric and electromagnetic monitoring, which record the spreading of nine thin CO2 layers. This paper presents a capillary flow model using invasion percolation physics that accurately matches the plume's geometry. The approach differs from standard Darcy flow simulations, which fail to match the plume geometry. The calibrated capillary flow simulation indicates that a mass balance for the plume is likely, but can only replicate the plume geometry if the thin intra-formational shale barriers are fractured. The model enables an estimate of the shale barrier behavior and caprock performance. The fractures are very unlikely to have been caused by CO2 injection given the confining stress of the rock and weak overpressure of the plume, and so fracturing must pre-date injection. A novel mechanism is suggested: the deglaciation of regional ice sheets that have rapidly and repeatedly unloaded approximately 1km of ice. The induced transient pore pressures are sufficient to hydro-fracture thin shales. The fractures enable fast CO2 ascent, resulting in a multi-layered plume. Shallow CO2 storage sites in the Northern North Sea and other regions that have been loaded by Quaternary ice sheets are likely to behave in a similar manner.  Introduction Climate change and ocean acidification are driven by high rates of CO2 emission to the atmosphere. One contribution to the mitigation of CO2 emissions is carbon capture and storage, CCS (Lovell, 2011). This is proposed by the G8 and the International Energy Agency as an essential technology for lowering greenhouse gas emissions. CCS reduces the emission of CO2 at a power station, or other large industrial sources such as oil and gas fields. This captured CO2 is compressed, transported by pipeline, and injected for storage into porous rock formations deep below the land or sea surface. Large-scale sites have been demonstrating engineered CO2 storage technology for nearly two decades. At the Sleipner field, CO2 is produced with natural gas and condensate, separated from the production stream, and compressed. The supercritical CO2 is then injected into the Utsira Formation, offshore Norway. This is the longest running carbon capture and storage experiment in the world, with more than 14 Mt of supercritical CO2 injected during the period 1996-2013. The injection schedule is intended to remain at around 0.9Mt/yr until around 2020, separating and storing CO2 from the West Sleipner gas-condensate field to prevent climate change. This is incentivized by the Norwegian state tax on offshore petroleum industry emissions, commencing in 1991 at NOK 210 and increasing to NOK 410 in 2013, equivalent to about $65 per tonne of CO2. The storage site, a saline formation and sandstone aquifer, is 800m below sea level (mbsl). This is considered to be a shallow depth setting for a storage environment (Chadwick et al., 2008) as the pressure and temperature conditions are likely to be close to the critical point above which CO2 becomes a more buoyant gas phase. The overlying Nordland Group, which extends from the top of the Utsira Formation to the seafloor, is predominantly shale (Fig. 1), and is expected to provide a caprock with a high threshold pressure, sufficient to seal the site and prevent leakage of the buoyant CO2 fluid over several millennia, i.e. the timescale required to offset climate change (Lindeberg and Bergmo, 2003). Saline formations worldwide are considered to be candidates for carbon sequestration because of their suitable depths, large storage volumes, and common occurrence. However, one of the critical uncertainties for saline formation storage is the ability of the caprock (primary seal), and the overlying containment geology (secondary seals), to retain buoyant CO2 without leakage. The fluid flow processes currently occurring in the Sleipner storage site provide a crucial exemplar for saline formation storage projects worldwide. Published interpretations of a series of seismic reflection surveys show that, by 1999, the Sleipner CO2 plume had ascended more than 200m vertically within the Utsira Formation from the injection point (1012mbsl) to the caprock (800mbsl). The plume has encountered and breached eight shale barriers within the storage site: seven thin shales that are approximately 1-2m thick, and an uppermost thick shale that is 6-7m thick and geologically similar to the primary seal (Gregersen and Johannessen, 2001; Zweigel et al., 2004). These shale barriers result in 10-20m thick CO2 layers that are vertically stacked and extend laterally for hundreds of meters. Biennial monitoring of the plume behavior and the resultant six seismic reflection surveys make this experiment ideally suited to numerical modeling studies (Hamborg et al., 2003; Zweigel et al., 2004; Hellevang, 2006). The areal distribution of CO2 stored within the storage site has been precisely mapped from the seismic surveys (Chadwick et al., 2006; Bickle et al., 2007). However, no published dynamic model to date has accurately replicated the layered morphology of the plume or flow behavior, and three significant aspects of the plume are poorly understood, as outlined below. Fundamental aspects of the CO2 plume layering are examined by constructing a mass-balanced flow model to test the physical containment processes through iterative numerical simulation. The simulations are calibrated to published observations. Capillary flow, not Darcy flow, is applied to obtain a good match with observations. It is essential for the calibration that the shale barriers within the Utsira Formation have high vertical permeabilities. This implies that the shales may be fractured. A novel mechanism is proposed to account for fracturing prior to CO2 injection: transient fluid overpressure during rapid deglaciation. 