A Panel of CpG Methylation Sites Distinguishes Human Embryonic Stem Cells and Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells  Summary Whether human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are epigenetically identical to human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) has been debated in the stem cell field. In this study, we analyzed DNA methylation patterns in a large number of hiPSCs (n = 114) and hESCs (n = 155), and identified a panel of 82 CpG methylation sites that can distinguish hiPSCs from hESCs with high accuracy. We show that 12 out of the 82 CpG sites were subject to hypermethylation in part by DNMT3B. Notably, DNMT3B contributes directly to aberrant hypermethylation and silencing of the signature gene, TCERG1L. Overall, we conclude that DNMT3B is involved in a wave of de novo methylation during reprogramming, a portion of which contributes to the unique hiPSC methylation signature. These 82 CpG methylation sites may be useful as biomarkers to distinguish between hiPSCs and hESCs. Highlights • Eighty-two DNA methylation sites distinguish hiPSCs and hESCs with high accuracy • Twelve aberrantly hypermethylated signature CG sites are due in part to DNMT3B • DNMT3B also contributes to previously reported aberrant hypermethylation in hiPSCs Huang et al. identify a panel of 82 CpG methylation sites that can robustly distinguish hiPSCs from hESCs with high accuracy. Part of the signature consists of aberrantly hypermethylated CpG sites, which are partially abrogated in the absence of DNMT3B. In addition, DNMT3B-mutant hiPSCs do not exhibit other aberrant hypermethylation signatures as previously reported.  Introduction DNA cytosine methylation is a major epigenetic factor that contributes to regulating important biological processes such as genomic imprinting, X inactivation, and gene regulation. DNA methylation is established and maintained by a family of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs), including DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B, and deficiency in any Dnmt enzyme leads to embryonic death in mice. Additionally, aberrant DNA methylation is associated with human diseases such as cancer, immunodeficiency, and neurological disorders (Feng and Fan, 2009). Collectively, these observations indicate that DNA methylation plays critical roles in mammalian development. DNA methylation is also important for both stem cell differentiation and cellular reprogramming. In differentiation, dynamic DNA methylation changes are critical for lineage specification as a wave of de novo methylation takes place to silence pluripotency genes and establish tissue-specific methylation patterns (Hawkins et al., 2010; Lister et al., 2009; Stadler et al., 2011). During reprogramming, DNA methylation contributes to an epigenetic barrier. Inhibiting the activities of DNMTs with 5-aza-cytidine (AzaC) or knocking down DNMT1 promotes partially reprogrammed cells into a fully reprogrammed state (Mikkelsen et al., 2008). Meanwhile, a wave of de novo methylation also occurs during reprogramming whereby tissue-specific genes and partially methylated domains (PMDs) become hypermethylated (Doi et al., 2009; Lister et al., 2009, 2011). Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have the characteristics of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), and many studies have investigated the similarities between iPSCs and hESCs, including genome stabilities, transcriptome (Chin et al., 2009; Guenther et al., 2010; Newman and Cooper, 2010; Wang et al., 2011) and histone modifications (Guenther et al., 2010), and DNA methylation (Bock et al., 2011; Doi et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2010; Lister et al., 2011; Ohi et al., 2011; Ruiz et al., 2012). These studies revealed both similarities and differences in the properties of iPSCs and hESCs. DNA methylation in iPSCs has been reported to acquire irregular methylation patterns while retaining some memory of somatic cells during the reprogramming process, thus exhibiting a methylation profile unique to iPSCs (Bock et al., 2011; Doi et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2010; Lister et al., 2011; Ohi et al., 2011). However, because these previous studies differed in the quantitation techniques, genome coverage, and sample sizes employed, it remains contentious whether iPSCs possess a methylation signature that can be used to distinguish iPSCs from hESCs. To address this issue, we systemically compared the methylation profiles of a large number of human iPSCs (hiPSCs) and hESCs from multiple labs to revisit the question of whether hiPSCs have a unique CpG methylation signature. We identified a panel of 82 CpGs that can distinguish hiPSCs from hESCs with high accuracy. Remarkably, 12 signature CpG sites tended to be hypermethylated compared with both somatic cells and hESCs, suggesting that these methylation signatures are not a form of residual somatic epigenetic memory. Hypermethylation of these 12 sites is partially disrupted in DNMT3B-deficient hiPSCs, consistent with the function of DNMT3B for de novo methylation during reprogramming. Together, our results demonstrate a robust hiPSC molecular signature that is partially a consequence of DNMT3B-mediated de novo methylation during reprogramming. 