Vascular Risk Status as a Predictor of Later-Life Depressive Symptoms: A Cohort Study  Background Common etiology of vascular diseases and later-life depression may provide important synergies for prevention. We examined whether standard clinical risk profiles developed for vascular diseases also predict depressive symptoms in older adults. Methods Data were drawn from the Whitehall II study with baseline examination in 1991; follow-up screenings in 1997, 2003, and 2008; and additional disease ascertainment from hospital data and registry linkage on 5318 participants (mean age 54.8 years, 31% women) without depressive symptoms at baseline. Vascular risk was assessed with the Framingham Cardiovascular, Coronary Heart Disease, and Stroke Risk Scores. New depressive symptoms at each follow-up screening were identified by General Health Questionnaire caseness, a Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale score ≥16, and use of antidepressant medication. Results Diagnosed vascular disease (that is, coronary heart disease or stroke) was associated with an increased risk for depressive symptoms, age- and sex-adjusted odds ratios from 1.5 (95% confidence interval 1.0-2.2) to 2.0 (1.4-3.0), depending on the indicator of depressive symptoms. Among participants without manifest vascular disease, the Stroke Risk Score was associated with Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale depressive symptoms before age 65 (age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio per 10% absolute change in the score = 3.1 [1.5-6.5]), but none of the risk scores predicted new-onset depressive symptoms in those aged ≥65 (odds ratios from .8 to 1.2). Conclusions These data suggest that public health measures to improve vascular risk status will influence the incidence of later-life depressive symptoms via reduced rates of manifest vascular disease.  The vascular (or subcortical ischemic) depression hypothesis suggests a link between vascular pathology and later life depression (1-4). The mechanisms underlying this link are thought to involve microdamage in small vessels in the frontal and subcortical regions of the brain, which are related to mood regulation, and also hypothesized to contribute to the development of depressive states (5). Epidemiological evidence shows vascular diseases, such as myocardial infarction and stroke, increase the risk of depression (6). Recently, Mast et al. (7) also found a composite score combining vascular diseases and vascular risk factors to predict 2-year incidence of elevated depressive symptoms in individuals aged 70 to 79, a finding replicated in another cohort of elders (8). However, few studies have been based on long follow-ups (1,2,9-11), and it is not known whether vascular risk factors in the absence of manifest vascular disease predict later-life depression risk among middle-aged individuals. The clinical significance of establishing a link between vascular risk status and later-life depression is in relation to prevention of mental disorders. Current guidelines on risk management and treatment of vascular diseases recommend use of multifactorial risk prediction algorithms (12-14), the Framingham risk scores being the most widely used and validated in clinical settings (15-17). These scores incorporate data on routinely measured risk factors, such as lipid levels, blood pressure, and smoking, to calculate risk of vascular disease at the individual level. The Framingham risk scores have been shown to predict incident coronary heart disease (CHD), stroke, and cognitive decline (15-18), but whether they also predict onset of depressive symptoms at older ages is unknown. In this study, we first examine the status of diagnosed vascular disease as a risk factor for depressive symptoms. We hypothesize that this association exists; this is in agreement with the current clinical guidelines that recommend screening patients with vascular disease for depressive symptoms (19-21). The second objective of this study is to examine whether in the absence of manifest cardiovascular disease (CVD), subclinical vascular risk status, measured with standard clinical risk scores developed for assessing risk of vascular disease, predicts depressive symptoms in older adults. An increased risk of depressive symptoms among persons with an adverse preclinical cardiovascular profile would suggest that public health measures to improve vascular risk status will also reduce prevalence of depressive symptoms. 