Specification of Functional Cranial Placode Derivatives from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells  Summary Cranial placodes are embryonic structures essential for sensory and endocrine organ development. Human placode development has remained largely inaccessible despite the serious medical conditions caused by the dysfunction of placode-derived tissues. Here, we demonstrate the efficient derivation of cranial placodes from human pluripotent stem cells. Timed removal of the BMP inhibitor Noggin, a component of the dual-SMAD inhibition strategy of neural induction, triggers placode induction at the expense of CNS fates. Concomitant inhibition of fibroblast growth factor signaling disrupts placode derivation and induces surface ectoderm. Further fate specification at the preplacode stage enables the selective generation of placode-derived trigeminal ganglia capable of in vivo engraftment, mature lens fibers, and anterior pituitary hormone-producing cells that upon transplantation produce human growth hormone and adrenocorticotropic hormone in vivo. Our results establish a powerful experimental platform to study human cranial placode development and set the stage for the development of human cell-based therapies in sensory and endocrine disease. Graphical Abstract Highlights • Timed withdrawal of BMP inhibitor is sufficient to induce placode fates from hESCs • Timed FGF inhibition suppresses placode fate and induces epidermal lineage • Placode-derived trigeminal neurons are functional in vitro and engraft in vivo • Pituitary placode-derived cells are capable of hormone release in vitro and in vivo Cranial placodes are essential for the development of sensory and endocrine organs. Here, Studer and colleagues report the efficient derivation of cranial placodes from human pluripotent stem cells. They demonstrate how to obtain specific placode derivatives such as trigeminal ganglia capable of in vivo engraftment, mature lens fibers, and anterior pituitary cells capable of producing human GH and ACTH in vivo. Their results establish a platform for studying human cranial placode development and for applications of placode derivatives in regenerative medicine.  Introduction Cranial placodes give rise to cells of the sensory organs, including the optic lens, the nasal epithelium, otic structures, the adenohypophysis, and a subset of cranial nerves such as the trigeminal ganglia. During development, sensory placodes are formed at the interface of the nonneural ectoderm and neural plate, surrounding the anterior portion of the future CNS (Figure S1A). Defects in placode development cause a wide spectrum of human congenital malformations ranging from blindness and deafness to hormone imbalance or loss of smell (Abdelhak et al., 1997; Baker and Bronner-Fraser, 2001; Ruf et al., 2004). To date, cranial placode development has been characterized in model organisms, including the frog, zebrafish, chicken, and, to a lesser extent, the mouse (Baker and Bronner-Fraser, 2001; Bhattacharyya and Bronner-Fraser, 2004; Schlosser, 2006). However, human placode development has remained largely unexplored due to lack of access to early human tissue and specific placode markers. Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including human embryonic (hESCs), and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have the potential to self-renew, while retaining a very broad differentiation potential. Over the last few years, protocols have been developed for directing the fate of hESCs into specific cell lineages. The derivation of CNS cells was among the first hESC differentiation protocols developed in the field (Reubinoff et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2001). The differentiation of hESCs into cells of the peripheral nervous system has also been achieved (Lee et al., 2007; Menendez et al., 2011). In contrast to the successful derivation and application of defined CNS-and neural-crest (NC)-derived cell types, there has been limited success on modeling cranial placode development in hPSCs. Recently, we developed a neural induction strategy based on the concomitant inhibition of the Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) and TGF-β/Activin/Nodal signaling pathways (dual-SMAD inhibition [dSMADi] (Chambers et al., 2009). Exposure to Noggin (N) and SB431542 (SB) leads to the synchronized, rapid and efficient differentiation of hPSCs into CNS fates. Here, we report that derepression of endogenous BMP signaling during dSMADi is sufficient for the selective induction of human cranial placodes. Using the placode induction protocol (PIP) >70% of all cells adopt a SIX1+ cranial placode precursor fate by day 11 of differentiation. We further identify a preplacodal lineage competent to differentiate into selective placode fates including trigeminal sensory neurons, mature lens fibers, and hormone-producing anterior pituitary cells. Trigeminal sensory neurons are characterized by marker expression, electrophysiology, and by transplantation into the developing chick embryo and the adult mouse CNS. Finally, we report the derivation of human pituitary cells producing growth hormone (GH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) hormones in vitro and in vivo. 