Fabrication of calcium phosphate fibres through electrospinning and sintering of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles  Abstract Calcium phosphate (CaP) materials such as synthetic hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca10(PO4)6·(OH)2) and β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP, Ca3(PO4)2) are well-known for their potential in bone tissue engineering and drug delivery applications. Processing such materials into submicrofibres might contribute to improve their biocompatibility. This paper presents a new method for creating CaP submicrofibres through the electrospinning route. A thermal treatment at sintering temperature (1100°C) was applied to electrospun polymer fibres filled with hydroxyapatite nanoparticles to cause aggregation of the nanoparticles and vaporise the polymer matrix. The images taken by electron microscopy revealed that the treated samples maintained their submicrofibrous morphology. Moreover, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis confirmed that the resulting fibres are made of hydroxypatite and tricalcium phosphates. Highlights • CaP submicrofibres can be produced by using a combination of electrospinning and sintering. • Electrospun fibres were produced from a PLGA solution highly concentrated with HA nanoparticles. • Heat treatments were applied to evaporate the polymer and induce sintering of the nanoparticles. • Hydroxypatite was identified to be the main material in the sintered scaffold. • Approach potentially applicable to make submicrofibres from a variety of ceramic material.  Introduction Calcium phosphate (CaP) materials are known to support bone ingrowth and to promote bone integration [1]. They are also non-toxic, biodegradable and can easily adsorb bioactive molecules at their surface. These characteristics make them useful for both tissue engineering (TE) and drug delivery applications [2,3]. Among CaP materials, synthetic hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca10PO46·(OH)2) and β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP, Ca3(PO4)2) are most widely used. HA is the main form of calcium-phosphate crystal found in human bone. Usually, the degradability of CaP materials varies according to the Ca/P ratio, with β-TCP being more soluble than HA [4]. Therefore, mixing CaP materials may help to control, to some extent, the degradation of the TE scaffold. In particular, HA/β-TCP ceramic scaffolds have been shown to be more effective in bone repair than pure HA or pure β-TCP [5]. CaP solid bodies have been used for many applications but they usually face the issue of being too brittle. The poor mechanical properties of CaP ceramic materials have severely obstructed their clinical applications [6]. Fibres and other types of particle are generally more successful for filling bone defects and helping to repair the damaged tissue. Furthermore, they can be dispersed in polymer matrices for mechanical reinforcement purposes and for improved biocompatibility [7]. CaP fibres have been produced through several routes including spinning, extrusion, precipitation, sol-gel and pyrolysis, and electrospinning [8-13]. Electrospinning is a simple technology that allows the production of nano- and micro-fibres by applying a high voltage to a polymer solution. It has been used to produce different types of ceramic fibres through the use of chemical precursors mixed to the polymer solution and by performing a thermal treatment on the resulting fibres [14,15]. However, the production of CaP fibres by electrospinning remains poorly investigated. Wu et al. have created HA microfibres by electrospinning a polymer mixture containing Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, (C2H5O)3PO (precursors) and by performing a thermal treatment on the collected fibres at 600°C for 1h [13]. The generation of HA nanofibres has been investigated by Kim and Kim [16]. They have based their strategy on the use of sol-gel precursors of the apatites and by adjusting the concentration of the sols, they could vary the diameter of the fibres in a range of a few micrometres to hundreds of nanometres. Calcination was performed at 700°C for 2h. Also, Tadjiev et al. have used the same precursors as Wu and colleagues and heat treatments between 500 and 800°C to produce β-TCP ceramic nanofibres [17]. Sintering of pure HA particles is usually reported to occur above 1000°C. The choice of the sintering temperature is important as it has an effect on the properties of the resulting sample. Most investigators agree that pure HA (ratio CaP=1.67) is stable in an air and argon atmosphere at temperatures upto 1200°C [18-20]. However, decomposition of HA at temperatures as low as 800°C has been observed for calcium deficient HA samples [19]. This paper investigates a new approach to obtain CaP submicrofibres through the electrospinning route. In a previous research article [7], we have demonstrated that HA nanoparticles can be incorporated into Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) fibres at high concentration (upto 50% in weight to volume ratio within the polymer solution). Here, we report that applying a heat treatment at sintering temperatures to such PLGA-HA composite fibres forces the aggregations of the nanoparticles and vaporises the polymer matrix, leading to the creation of CaP submicrofibres. 