Bacterial involvement in otitis media with effusion  Abstract Objective Otitis media with effusion (OME), a common chronic childhood condition affecting hearing, is thought to be a result of bacterial infection, with biofilms recently implicated. Although bacterial DNA can be detected by polymerase chain reaction in 80% of patients, typically fewer than half of effusions are positive using standard culture techniques. We adopted an alternative approach to demonstrating bacteria in OME, using a bacterial viability stain and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM): staining allows detection of live bacteria without requiring growth on culture, while CLSM allows demonstration of the three-dimensional structure typical of biofilms. Methods Effusion samples were collected at the time of ventilation tube insertion, analysed with CLSM and bacterial viability stain, and extended culture techniques performed with the intention of capturing all possible organisms. Results Sixty-two effusions (42 patients) were analysed: 28 (45.2%) were culture-positive, but 51 (82.3%) were CLSM-positive. Combining the two techniques demonstrated live bacteria in 57 (91.8%) samples. Using CLSM, bacteria exhibited biofilm morphology in 25 effusions and were planktonic in 26; the proportion of samples exhibiting biofilm morphology was similar in the culture-positive and culture-negative groups (50.0% and 48.3%, respectively). Biofilm samples contained an average of 1.7 different bacterial isolates and planktonic samples 2.0, with the commonest bacteria identified being coagulase-negative staphylococci. Conclusion Live bacteria are present in most effusions, strongly suggesting that bacteria and biofilms are important in the aetiopathogenesis of OME.  Introduction Glue ear (otitis media with effusion, OME) is the commonest cause of deafness in children in the developed world with point prevalence in the region of 20%, and up to 80% of children are affected at least temporarily by the age of 10 years [1,2]. OME, acute otitis media (AOM) and recurrent AOM (3 or more episodes in 6 months) are closely related clinical conditions [3]. AOM represents an acute infective (bacterial and/or viral) process, whereas OME is characterised by the presence of a middle ear effusion in the absence of symptoms and signs of acute inflammation [4]. OME and AOM are the leading cause of primary care visits, and the most frequent reason for antibiotics or surgery [5,6]. Although in the majority of cases OME is transient, a proportion of children develop persistent symptoms that may affect hearing, education, language or behaviour [2]. If OME persists after a three month period of watchful waiting, treatment with ventilation tubes (VTs or grommets) or hearing aids may be considered [2]. Most UK parents opt for surgery, and VT insertion is one of the commonest surgical procedures in children in the developed world [4]. VT insertion is currently the only effective treatment to restore hearing but it requires a general anaesthetic in children. In addition, about a quarter of cases will require further surgical treatment within 2 years [7], with the average number of procedures per patient being 2.1 [8]. Numerous medical treatments have also been tried. Antibiotics particularly have received considerable attention, but although oral antibiotics are effective in resolving OME in the short term, there is no long-term benefit, and it is not a recommended treatment in the UK [2,6,9]. Due to its major socio-economic and health care importance, much attention has focused on the aetiology of OME [6]. It is a chronic inflammatory condition affecting the middle ear mucosa resulting in secretion of mucus that accumulates in the middle ear cleft [4,10]. However, the cause of the inflammatory response has been difficult to identify especially because OME is not characterised by symptoms and signs of acute inflammation that would be expected in a typical acute bacterial infection caused by planktonic bacteria; there is no pain, fever, or tympanic membrane inflammation. The role of bacteria in OME has therefore been controversial. The typical bacteria implicated in OME are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis and Haemophilus influenzae [4], but in most studies bacteria were culturable in less than half of samples, ranging from 21 to 70% [11-16]. Although this may suggest that bacteria are not important in OME, it contrasts with studies examining effusions for the presence of bacterial nucleic acids by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which have demonstrated bacterial DNA typically in excess of 80% of effusions [4,17,18]. However, the presence of bacterial nucleic acids does not necessarily equate to the presence of viable bacteria as components of effusion samples have been shown to inhibit nuclease activity, and this has been postulated to cause the persistence of RNA and DNA even if bacteria are no longer viable [19]. A possible explanation for the discrepancy between high PCR-positive rate and low culture-positive rate in OME is the involvement of biofilms in the progression of this pathology [20]. Indeed, biofilms have been identified on human middle ear mucosa in children with OME and/or recurrent AOM in more than 90% of cases, but not in any control samples studied [12]. In addition to tissue surfaces, biofilms have also been identified attached to mucus [21,22] and attach in vitro to collagen gel matrix [23]. In OME, biofilms may be attached to mucus as well as mucosa, thus providing the inflammatory stimulus leading to a middle ear effusion [10,13,24]. To demonstrate bacteria and biofilms in OME, an alternative approach was adopted in this study. In addition to extended microbial culture on a wide variety of media of middle ear effusion samples taken at the time of VT insertion, effusions were also analysed using a bacterial viability stain and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). The advantage of the former technique is that staining allows detection of live bacteria without requiring them to grow on culture, while CLSM demonstrates three-dimensional structure of bacterial communities typical of biofilms [25]. The results presented here differ from data presented by Hall-Stoodley et al. in that the present analysis relates to the middle ear effusion itself, rather than the mucosal biopsies examined by previous research [12]. This study aimed to determine the proportion of effusion samples that could be shown to contain live bacteria on extended culture and/or CLSM with bacterial viability staining. We also identified the bacteria involved, and determined whether they existed as biofilms in middle ear effusions. 