Inelastic neutron scattering study of binding of para-hydrogen in an ultra-microporous metal-organic framework  Graphical abstract Abstract Metal-organic framework (MOF) materials show promise for H2 storage and it is widely predicted by computational modelling that MOFs incorporating ultra-micropores are optimal for H2 binding due to enhanced overlapping potentials. We report the investigation using inelastic neutron scattering of the interaction of H2 in an ultra-microporous MOF material showing low H2 uptake capacity. The study has revealed that adsorbed H2 at 5K has a liquid recoil motion along the channel with very little interaction with the MOF host, consistent with the observed low uptake. The low H2 uptake is not due to incomplete activation or decomposition as the desolvated MOF shows CO2 uptake with a measured pore volume close to that of the single crystal pore volume. This study represents a unique example of surprisingly low H2 uptake within a MOF material, and complements the wide range of studies on systems showing higher uptake capacities and binding interactions.  Introduction Hydrogen (H2) is a promising alternative energy carrier not only because it can potentially achieve zero-carbon emission at the point of use, but also because H2 has a high energy density (33.3kWh/kg) compared to hydrocarbons (12.4-13.9kWh/kg) [1]. The major scientific challenge for on-board H2 applications is that of inventing effective and efficient H2 storage materials, and there is an ever-increasing worldwide interest in meeting the United States Department of Energy's (DoE) H2 storage targets of 5.5wt% gravimetric and 40gL-1 volumetric by 2017. It is important to note that the DoE targets refer to storage within the whole system rather than within the storage medium alone, with a target operating temperature of -40 to 60°C and an operating pressure below 100atm. Although solid-state H2 storage based on chemisorption and physisorption has been extensively studied over recent years, so far no material is able to meet this DoE target thus presenting a major impediment for the realisation of the "Hydrogen Economy". Nevertheless, physisorption of molecular H2 based upon the non-dissociative interaction in porous solids is an especially attractive option since it shows fast kinetics and favourable thermodynamics over multiple adsorption and release cycles [2]. Thus, enormous efforts have been focused on developing new porous solid materials for high capacity H2 storage. Metal-organic framework (MOF) complexes are a sub-class of porous solids which show great promise for gas storage and separation due to their high surface area, low framework density, and tuneable functional pore environment [3]. MOF materials are usually built up from metal ions or clusters bridged by organic linkers to afford 3D extended frameworks with the formation of cavities ranging from microporous to mesoporous region. Several members within this MOF family have achieved impressively high H2 adsorption capacities (albeit at cryogenic temperatures, typically at 77K) [4] with a record of ∼16wt% total uptake capacity observed in NU-100 [5] and MOF-200 [6]. However, these high uptake capacities drop dramatically with increasing temperature, and thus none is a practical material. There is thus particular emphasis on optimising the interactions between MOF hosts and adsorbed H2 molecules, and the identification of specific binding interactions and properties of gases within confined space represents an important methodology for the development of better materials that may lead us to systems of practical use. In situ neutron powder diffraction (NPD) at below 10K has been used previously to determine the locations of D2 within a few best-behaving MOF materials incorporating exposed metal sites [7-12]. It has been found that D2 can bind directly to vacant sites on metal centres, and that the adsorbed D2 molecules have molecular separations comparable to that to D2 in the solid state. These studies have provided invaluable structural rationale for their observed high gas adsorption capacities. Research has thus focused understandably on MOFs with high H2 uptake capacities, while materials showing very low H2 uptake and/or incorporate fully coordinated metal centres are often ignored for this study. Therefore, information on binding interactions within those low-uptake MOF systems is entirely lacking, but can still give important complementary data and potential understanding for the subsequent design and optimisation of hydrogen storage materials. It is critical to the success of the NPD technique that the MOF complex adsorbs a significant amount of D2 to boost the observed signal. This technique therefore has disadvantages when studying the binding interaction within MOFs with low uptakes. Furthermore, static crystallographic studies cannot provide insights into the dynamics of the adsorbed gas molecules. Thus, it is very challenging to probe experimentally the H2 binding interactions within a porous host system which has very low gas uptake due to the lack of suitable characterisation techniques. We report herein the application of the in situ inelastic neutron scattering (INS) technique to permit direct observation of the dynamics of the binding interactions between adsorbed H2 molecules and an aluminium-based porous MOF, NOTT-300, exhibiting moderate porosity, narrow pore window and very low uptake of H2. This neutron spectroscopy study reveals that adsorbed H2 molecules do not interact with the organic ligand within the pore channels, and form very weak interactions with [Al(OH)2O4] moieties via a type of through-spacing interaction (Al-O⋯H2). Interestingly, the very low H2 adsorption has been successfully characterised as weak binding interactions and, for the first time, we have found that the adsorbed H2 in the pore channel has a liquid type recoil motion at 5K (below its melting point) as a direct result of this weak interaction to the MOF host. 