Generation of Multipotent Foregut Stem Cells from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells  Summary Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) could provide an infinite source of clinically relevant cells with potential applications in regenerative medicine. However, hPSC lines vary in their capacity to generate specialized cells, and the development of universal protocols for the production of tissue-specific cells remains a major challenge. Here, we have addressed this limitation for the endodermal lineage by developing a defined culture system to expand and differentiate human foregut stem cells (hFSCs) derived from hPSCs. hFSCs can self-renew while maintaining their capacity to differentiate into pancreatic and hepatic cells. Furthermore, near-homogenous populations of hFSCs can be obtained from hPSC lines which are normally refractory to endodermal differentiation. Therefore, hFSCs provide a unique approach to bypass variability between pluripotent lines in order to obtain a sustainable source of multipotent endoderm stem cells for basic studies and to produce a diversity of endodermal derivatives with a clinical value. Highlights • Multipotent foregut stem cells are derived from pluripotent cells • Foregut stem cells can be expanded and retain their differentiation potential • Foregut stem cells differentiate into liver and pancreatic cells • Foregut stem cells decrease differentiation variability between cell lines Hannan, Vallier, and colleagues have developed a defined culture system to differentiate and expand human foregut stem cells (hFSCs) from human pluripotent cells. hFSCs can self-renew while maintaining their capacity to differentiate into pancreatic and hepatic cells. hFSCs represent a sustainable source of multipotent endodermal cells for basic studies and can produce a diversity of endodermal derivatives with clinical value.  Introduction The development of a universal protocol to differentiate any hPSC line into a homogenous population of a specific cell type has been rendered difficult by the inherent variability that exists between lines. Epigenetic memory, inconsistent reprogramming, and genetic background are likely to be the main cause of this variability, which represents a major challenge for the development of personalized medicines (Lund et al., 2012) and for modeling diseases with a low-penetrance phenotype. The expansion of intermediate stages of differentiation could represent an attractive alternative to address this issue, especially if these cell types can be isolated from a heterogeneous population. For example, neuronal stem cells can be easily expanded from human induced pluripotent stem cell (hIPSC) lines differentiated toward the neuroectoderm lineage and then differentiated into a diversity of neurons, thereby bypassing the need to continuously grow pluripotent cells (Falk et al., 2012). However, the same approach with endoderm differentiation has been more problematic because the complex combination of inductive signals controlling the specification and patterning of this germ layer can be difficult to mimic in vitro (Sneddon et al., 2012). Following gastrulation, definitive endoderm migrates to form the primitive gut, which initially consists of a single flattened sheet of cells surrounded by mesoderm. Simultaneously, as migration is occurring, the primitive gut is becoming regionalized along the dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes into foregut, midgut, and hindgut domains (Wells and Melton, 1999). This patterning is induced by the surrounding mesoderm, which secretes a variety of growth factors not limited to activin, Wnt, fibroblast growth factor (FGF), and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signal pathways (Deutsch et al., 2001; Zaret, 2002). The effects of these signaling pathways can be observed at the molecular level with distinct expression patterns of genes such as SOX2 in the foregut and CDX2 in the hindgut, while early PDX1 expression marks the midgut (Zorn and Wells, 2009). It is from the foregut region that many of the major organ systems develop such as the liver, thyroid, lungs, the upper airways, the billary system, stomach, and pancreas. The induction of these organs is orchestrated by a complex combination of morphogen gradients secreted by other developing organ systems such as the cardiac mesoderm (Lemaigre and Zaret, 2004). The exact nature of these concentration gradients remains difficult to reproduce faithfully in vitro, but several groups (including our own) have made significant progress in understanding how different signaling pathways impact the foregut endoderm cells (Cho et al., 2012). To date, no one has described a foregut cell type that possesses the proliferative and differentiation potential observed within the early mammalian gut tube. To address this challenge, we have developed a defined culture system to derive human foregut stem cells (hFSCs) from hPSCs. These stem cells can self-renew in vitro and resemble multipotent cells of the anterior primitive gut tube by their capacity to differentiate into pancreatic and hepatic cells. Furthermore, hFSCs can be easily derived from hIPSC lines resistant to endoderm differentiation, thereby enabling the production of endodermal derivatives from a broad number of hPSC lines. 