Investigating the feasibility of scale up and automation of human induced pluripotent stem cells cultured in aggregates in feeder free conditions  Highlights • First published protocol for scalable automation of hiPSC in feeder-free conditions. • Successful transfer of hiPSC between sites representative of research and manufacture. • Comparability between manual and automated expansion protocols for hiPSC. Abstract The transfer of a laboratory process into a manufacturing facility is one of the most critical steps required for the large scale production of cell-based therapy products. This study describes the first published protocol for scalable automated expansion of human induced pluripotent stem cell lines growing in aggregates in feeder-free and chemically defined medium. Cells were successfully transferred between different sites representative of research and manufacturing settings; and passaged manually and using the CompacT SelecT automation platform. Modified protocols were developed for the automated system and the management of cells aggregates (clumps) was identified as the critical step. Cellular morphology, pluripotency gene expression and differentiation into the three germ layers have been used compare the outcomes of manual and automated processes.  Introduction Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC) are generated from reprogrammed fibroblasts by overexpression of pluripotency factors (Takahashi et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2007). These pluripotent cells have the unique characteristic to self renew in vitro while maintaining the capacity to differentiate into a broad number of cell types. By combining these unique properties, hiPSC could enable the generation of large quantity of cells for clinical applications. Furthermore, the possibility of generating hiPSC from somatic cells using epigenetic reprogramming represents a unique opportunity for personalized regenerative medicine. Indeed, these pluripotent stem cells could enable the production of patient specific cell types that are fully immuno-compatible with the original donor thereby avoiding the need for immune suppressive treatment after cell transplantation. Nevertheless, the practical, financial and temporal obstacles in producing and validating personalized clinical-grade hiPSC and their differentiated progeny will almost certainly limit the feasibility of this approach. These limitations could selectively restrict patient access to autologous cell-based therapies (Faden et al., 2003). The creation of clinical banks of hiPSC from donors that can provide HLA matching to recipients is proposed as a strategy to attenuate the host immune response to transplanted tissue (Lin et al., 2009; Taylor et al., 2005, 2011). Similarly, hiPSC can be used to develop in vitro disease models, allowing large scale studies otherwise restricted due to the limited availability of primary cells and biopsy material. This application has been proven useful to model neurodegenerative diseases, cardiac syndromes and metabolic disorders in vitro for basic studies and drug screening (Ebert et al., 2009; Moretti et al., 2010; Rashid et al., 2010). However, each of these applications requires large quantity of hiPSC produced in reproducible and standardized ways. Indeed, expansion of hiPSC remains time and resources consuming while experimental variability due to human intervention is almost systematic. Process automation has been a key mechanism to achieve controlled and standardized cell production. Successful automated protocols have been developed for the expansion of human mesenchymal stem cells (Thomas et al., 2007) and human embryonic stem cells (hESC) (Thomas et al., 2009b). Scale up automation enables scale out for conventional formats with predictable process variation and quality outcome by removing manual interventions. However, little work has been done in developing technologies for automation and scale up of hiPSC for healthcare applications. Several solutions and technologies have been developed for live cell production in suspension platforms (Ratcliffe et al., 2012). However these are not readily adapted for cells growing in adherent conditions. Furthermore, large scale production of hiPSC for clinical applications would require expansion in culture using clinically compatible conditions in a reproducible way without loss of function and in sufficient numbers to create reproducible and cost effective therapeutic products. Finally, passaging represent the main difficulty to develop an automation platform to expand hiPSC since these cells must be propagated as aggregates/clumps to maintain their integrity and quality (Beers et al., 2012). Indeed, evidence indicates that hiPSC grown and harvested as single cells are more likely to acquire genetic anomalies (Amps et al., 2011). Consequently, standardization of cell counting and cell clump size measurement has proven to be impractical. Here, we have addressed all these issues by transferring an established manual method to grow hiPSC in feeder free and chemically defined medium onto an automated platform compatible with large scale production. This study shows for the first time that large scale automated production of hiPSC is possible without the need of single cell dissociation thereby respecting their natural properties. 