The effects of particle morphology on the analysis of discrete particle dispersion using Delaunay tessellation  Abstract Particle-reinforced composites and nanocomposites can contain a wide range of discrete particles, of various morphologies (e.g. spherical, fibre, and tube). Two-dimensional micrographs of the material are used to assess whether the particles are well- or poorly-dispersed, but typically use the assumption that all particles are identical and spherical. However we show, by considering elliptical particles, that the sizing and shapes of the discrete particles can change the overall appearance of the system, without the underlying mechanisms changing. Thus our interpretation of particle dispersion is obtained by comparing our measurements to a reference system, which takes into account the particle morphologies, and demonstrates that discrepancies are brought on by oversimplification.  Introduction Particulate composites are an important and well-established class of composite materials. The quality of discrete particle (nanoparticle) dispersion, which characterises the uniformity in spread of the particles through the material (i.e. whether the particles are ordered, random or clustered) can affect the material properties [1]. It is time-consuming and expensive to obtain micrographs of a composite material, and so only a few images are available for analysis. Hence robust quantitative analysis must be performed on the available micrographs to obtain an objective measurement of dispersion. The measurement of nanoparticle dispersion is rapidly advancing [2-5]. Ideally these techniques would be applied universally to any type of nanocomposite or particulate-reinforced material. These require a comparison against a known reference system, where typically the particles are either perfectly or randomly dispersed. Inappropriate idealisation of both the quality of the data and the particle morphology (i.e. the particle shape) leads to inaccurate conclusions. Nonetheless many analyses assume that theories where the particles are point-like (i.e. having no volume or shape) are valid. Thus a major hindrance is that it is not well understood how the morphological (shape) properties of the nanoparticles affect these parameters. 