Development of a pearl millet Striga-resistant genepool: Response to five cycles of recurrent selection under Striga-infested field conditions in West Africa  Highlights • A Striga-resistant genepool was developed in West African cultivated pearl millet. • We examine the response of the diversified genepool to five cycles of selection. • Selection significantly increased panicle yield, Striga and downy mildew resistance. • The observed genetic variation and heritabilities enable further selection gains. • The derived varieties will contribute to integrated Striga control in West Africa. Abstract Striga hermonthica (Del.) Benth. is a persistent threat to pearl millet [Cenchrus americanus (L.) Morrone, comb. nov.] production, especially in West Africa. This study aimed at evaluating the response of a diversified pearl millet genepool to five cycles of recurrent selection targeting Striga resistance and panicle yield, and to a lesser extent downy mildew [Sclerospora graminicola (Sacc.) J. Schroet.] resistance. Two-hundred full-sib families (FS) representing the C5 selection cycle were evaluated together with the genepool parental landraces, experimental varieties derived from previous cycles and local checks in Striga-infested fields at Sadoré (Niger) and Cinzana (Mali). Substantial and mostly significant selection progress could be documented. The accumulated percentage gain from selection amounted to 51%/1% lower Striga infestation (measured by area under Striga number progress curve, ASNPC), 46%/62% lower downy mildew incidence, and 49%/31% higher panicle yield of the C5-FS compared to the mean of the genepool parents at Sadoré/Cinzana, respectively. Experimental varieties selected from previous cycles also revealed lower ASNPC and mostly higher yield compared to genepool parents at their selection sites. Significant genetic variation among the C5-FS and operative heritabilities of 76% (Cinzana), 84% (Sadoré) and 34% (combined across locations) for ASNPC will enable continued selection gain for Striga resistance. High genotype×environment interaction variances for all target traits suggest that different experimental varieties need to be extracted from the genepool for different sites. The genepool-derived varieties will be further validated on-farm and are expected to contribute to integrated Striga control in pearl millet in West Africa.  Introduction Pearl millet [Cenchrus americanus (L.) Morrone, comb. nov.] (Chemisquy et al., 2010) is the staple food and fodder crop of millions of poor rural families in Africa and India (Hash et al., 2000; Senthilvel et al., 2008). In the arid and semi-arid regions where this cereal is cultivated, pearl millet plays an important role in food security. However, grain yields are generally low (circa 350-600kgha-1). Grain yield is limited by abiotic stresses like drought and low soil fertility, and biotic stresses such as downy mildew disease and the parasitic weed Striga. Striga hermonthica (Del.) Benth. is the most widespread and destructive witchweed affecting cereals. In the Striga-prone regions of sub-Saharan Western and Central Africa, S. hermonthica remains the major biotic and persistent threat to pearl millet production and productivity (Wilson et al., 2004). About 40% of the cereal producing areas is severely infested with Striga in sub-Saharan Africa (Gurney et al., 2006). Grain yield losses up to 100% have been reported in susceptible cereal cultivars under high infestation levels, particularly under drought conditions (Gurney et al., 2006; Ejeta, 2007; Amusan et al., 2008). Several options have been recommended for Striga control: hand weeding, herbicides, rotations of cash or trap crops with cereals, improved soil fertility, intercropping and biological control (Haussmann et al., 2000). However, the diversity of the farming systems and of the parasite have rendered the use of a single control method ineffective, leading to the development of integrated Striga control packages that combine several control measures (e.g., Badu-Apraku, 2010). Breeding cultivars that can withstand parasite infection is considered to be central to integrated approaches to Striga control in pearl millet. Employing host resistance to S. hermonthica is simple and economical for subsistence farmers to adopt (Ejeta, 2007; Menkir and Kling, 2007; Wilson et al., 2000). Inheritance of traits associated with resistance to Striga spp. has been reported for sorghum, maize and rice (Haussmann et al., 2001a, 2004; Amusan et al., 2008; Gurney et al., 2006). The low stimulation of S. asiatica seed germination has been reported to be under the control of a single recessive gene in the sorghum cultivars Framida, 555, SRN 6496, and SRN 39 (Hess and Ejeta, 1992; Ezeaku and Gupta, 2004). One major gene and several minor genes are involved in stimulation of S. hermonthica seed germination in sorghum (Haussmann et al., 2001a), and the major gene has recently been mapped (Satish et al., 2011). Field resistance to Striga in maize is considered a quantitatively inherited trait (Kim, 1994; Gethi and Smith, 2004; Amusan et al., 2008). The heredity of host-plant resistance to Striga in pearl millet is not well documented. Few pearl millet cultivars have been reported as partially resistant or tolerant to Striga, and resistance (or at least a lower level of susceptibility) in certain pearl millet materials was shown to be dominant (Ramaiah, 1987). However, the very existence of Striga resistance in cultivated pearl millet has been questioned by others (Chisi and Esele, 1997). Lack of precise and validated information about Striga resistance in pearl millet may be partially due to the fact that the pearl millet/S. hermonthica pathosystem is particularly complex. Both host and parasite are highly out-crossing species, which results in each plant in a pearl millet landrace, improved open-pollinated variety or genepool population having a different genotype and therefore carrying potentially different alleles for Striga resistance or susceptibility. Similarly, each S. hermonthica plant in a natural population carries potentially different alleles for virulence. Partial quantitative resistance to S. hermonthica was reported in wild pearl millet relatives from Africa (Wilson et al., 2000, 2004). However, from a breeder's point of view, it appears preferable to work within a dynamic and diversified genepool of cultivated pearl millets using recurrent selection methods as wild millet relatives carry many undesirable alleles that need to be eliminated, thereby slowing down selection progress. Downy mildew [caused by the oomycete Sclerospora graminicola (Sacc.) J. Schroet.] is a pseudo-fungal disease of pearl millet, causing up to 60% crop loss (Singh, 1990; Thakur et al., 2011) and needs to be considered in pearl millet improvement. Both Striga and downy mildew pathogens are highly variable, and different ecotypes can be present at different locations (Haussmann et al., 2001b; Thakur et al., 2006; Yoshida et al., 2010), underlining the need to perform selection at contrasting locations to exploit genotype×location interactions and/or identify stable varieties. According to our knowledge, there is no Striga-resistant pearl millet variety released in West Africa. To date, increased resistance to Striga through recurrent selection has not been reported for pearl millet. Since 2006, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) in Niger, in partnership with the national agricultural research program in Mali (Institut d'Economie Rurale, IER), has conducted recurrent selection in a diversified pearl millet genepool to increase frequencies of desirable alleles for Striga and downy mildew resistance and panicle yield using two test sites in West Africa (Sadoré in Niger and Cinzana in Mali). In total, this genepool was subjected to five cycles of recurrent selection, and provides a unique opportunity to examine the effectiveness of recurrent selection for improving Striga and downy mildew resistance, and yield performance in cultivated pearl millet. The objectives of this study were (i) to describe the genepool development and selection process, (ii) to examine the response to five cycles of recurrent selection for panicle yield and resistance to S. hermonthica and downy mildew, (iii) to estimate quantitative-genetic parameters and predict possible future selection gains from the genepool's C5-Full-sib population. 