Grain boundary excess volume and defect annealing of copper after high-pressure torsion  Abstract The release of excess volume upon recrystallization of ultrafine-grained Cu deformed by high-pressure torsion (HPT) was studied by means of the direct technique of high-precision difference dilatometry in combination with differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and scanning electron microscopy. From the length change associated with the removal of grain boundaries in the wake of crystallite growth, a structural key quantity of grain boundaries, the grain boundary excess volume or expansion eGB=(0.46±0.11)×10-10 m was directly determined. The value is quite similar to that measured by dilatometry for grain boundaries in HPT-deformed Ni. Activation energies for crystallite growth of 0.99±0.11 and 0.96±0.06eV are derived by Kissinger analysis from dilatometry and DSC data, respectively. In contrast to Ni, substantial length change proceeds in Cu at elevated temperatures beyond the regime of dominant crystallite growth. In the light of recent findings from tracer diffusion and permeation experiments, this is associated with the shrinkage of nanovoids at high temperatures.  Introduction Processing by severe plastic deformation (SPD) has been established as one of the most promising routes to produce bulk ultrafine or even nanocrystalline materials. These materials made by SPD exhibit exceptional mechanical properties (see e.g. Refs. [1-4]). A comprehensive understanding of these enhanced properties and of the process of grain refinement during severe plastic deformation is currently a major research topic in materials science. In particular, the roles of the various types of defects produced during deformation are widely studied. Furthermore, from a basic materials physics point of view, SPD metals offer the opportunity to study different types of deformation-induced defects and their mutual interaction. It has already been shown that athermally produced excess vacancies are present in high concentrations that are otherwise found only close to the melting temperature [5,6]. A complex defect annealing kinetics is suggested from volume and grain boundary diffusion studies in SPD-processed Cu and Ni [7,8]. During annealing, abundant and highly mobile vacancies may, for example, agglomerate or form a percolating porosity network in combination with triple junctions of grain boundaries. In addition, ultrafine-grained SPD materials give access to basic physical key parameters and processes such as thermally activated grain boundary relaxation prior to grain growth, as well as to the grain boundary excess volume, often also denoted as grain boundary expansion, of relaxed high-angle grain boundaries [9]. For this purpose, the direct experimental method of difference dilatometry is applied in the present work in combination with differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The subjects of the present study are high-purity samples of the face-centered cubic (fcc) metals Cu and Ni. Novel results obtained from difference dilatometry for copper are compared with results obtained by the other above-mentioned methods, as well as with results previously obtained for pure nickel. 