The escape of heavy atoms from the ionosphere of HD209458b. II. Interpretation of the observations  Highlights ► We compare UV transits of HD209458b with empirical and hydrodynamic models. ► We constrain the mean temperature, densities and escape rates of different species. ► The detection of atomic oxygen implies a minimum mass loss rate of 6×106kgs-1. ► The results constrain the temperature, chemistry, and ionization of the atmosphere. ► Detection of Si2+ indicates that clouds of forsterite and enstatite do not form. Abstract Transits in the H I 1216Å (Lyman α), O I 1334Å, C II 1335Å, and Si III 1206.5Å lines constrain the properties of the upper atmosphere of HD209458b. In addition to probing the temperature and density profiles in the thermosphere, they have implications for the properties of the lower atmosphere. Fits to the observations with a simple empirical model and a direct comparison with a more complex hydrodynamic model constrain the mean temperature and ionization state of the atmosphere, and imply that the optical depth of the extended thermosphere of the planet in the atomic resonance lines is significant. In particular, it is sufficient to explain the observed transit depths in the H I 1216Å line. The detection of O at high altitudes implies that the minimum mass loss rate from the planet is approximately 6×106kgs-1. The mass loss rate based on our hydrodynamic model is higher than this and implies that diffusive separation is prevented for neutral species with a mass lower than about 130amu by the escape of H. Heavy ions are transported to the upper atmosphere by Coulomb collisions with H+ and their presence does not provide as strong constraints on the mass loss rate as the detection of heavy neutral atoms. Models of the upper atmosphere with solar composition and heating based on the average solar X-ray and EUV flux agree broadly with the observations but tend to underestimate the transit depths in the O I, C II, and Si III lines. This suggests that the temperature and/or elemental abundances in the thermosphere may be higher than expected from such models. Observations of the escaping atmosphere can potentially be used to constrain the strength of the planetary magnetic field. We find that a magnetic moment of m≲0.04mJ, where mJ is the jovian magnetic moment, allows the ions to escape globally rather than only along open field lines. The detection of Si2+ in the thermosphere indicates that clouds of forsterite and enstatite do not form in the lower atmosphere. This has implications for the temperature and dynamics of the atmosphere that also affect the interpretation of transit and secondary eclipse observations in the visible and infrared wavelengths.  Introduction The detection of H, O, C+, and Si2+ in the upper atmosphere of HD209458b (Vidal-Madjar et al., 2003, 2004; Linsky et al., 2010), and the tentative detection of H in the upper atmosphere of HD189733b (Lecavelier des Etangs et al., 2010) and Mg+ in the upper atmosphere of WASP-12b (Fossati et al., 2010) are among the most exciting recent discoveries related to the atmospheres of extrasolar giant planets (EGPs). The observations demonstrate that the upper atmospheres of close-in EGPs such as HD209458b differ significantly from the thermospheres of the giant planets in the Solar System. They are much hotter, they extend to several planetary radii and instead of molecular hydrogen, they are primarily composed of atoms and atomic ions. The detection of heavy atoms and ions such as O, C+, Si2+, and Mg+ implies that the atmospheres of close-in EGPs are not always affected by diffusive separation. A likely explanation is that diffusive separation of the heavy atoms and ions is prevented by momentum transfer collisions with the rapidly escaping light atoms and ions. Mass fractionation during hydrodynamic escape is believed to have played an important role in the early evolution of the atmospheres of the terrestrial planets (e.g., Zahnle and Kasting, 1986; Hunten et al., 1987) but it cannot be observed in action anywhere in the Solar System. Observations of EGP atmospheres thus provide a unique opportunity to study this phenomenon that should lead to a better understanding of evolutionary processes in our own Solar System. Extended thermospheres give rise to large transit depths in UV transmission spectra. However, they are also potentially detectable in optical and infrared spectra. For instance, Coustenis et al. (1997, 1998) searched for an exosphere around 51 Peg b in the near-IR. In line with the current understanding, they suggested that the exospheres of close-in EGPs such as 51 Peg b are hot and composed primarily of atoms and ions. They also argued that hydrodynamic escape can lead to the escape of heavier species, and give rise to large in-transit absorption by such species in optical and near-IR spectra. However, 51 Peg b is not a transiting planet and the search for an exosphere around it was not successful. On the other hand, once the transit of HD209458b was first detected (Charbonneau et al., 2000; Henry et al., 2000), similar searches on this planet were also undertaken. Moutou et al. (2001) looked for absorption by species such as Na,H,He,CH+,CO+,N2+, and H2O+ in the upper atmosphere of HD209458b. These observations were followed by Moutou et al. (2003) who attempted to measure the transit depth in the He 1083nm line that was predicted to be significant by Seager and Sasselov (2000). The most recent searches were reported by Winn et al. (2004) and Narita et al. (2005) who looked for transits in the Na D, Li, Hα, Hβ, Hγ, Fe, and Ca absorption lines. So far none of the ground-based searches have led to a detection of the upper atmosphere. However, the non-detection is based on only a few observations that have proven difficult to analyze, and the search should continue. Visible and infrared observations have been able to probe the atmosphere of HD209458b at lower altitudes. In fact, HD209458b was the first EGP to have its atmosphere detected by transmission spectroscopy. The first detection was achieved by Charbonneau et al. (2002) who observed a deeper in-transit absorption in the Na D 589.3nm resonance doublet compared to the adjacent wavelength bands. This detection was based on four transits observed with the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) onboard the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) (Brown et al., 2001). The same data were later reanalyzed by Sing et al. (2008a,b) who combined them with other observations (Knutson et al., 2007) and created a transmission spectrum of HD209458b at wavelengths of 300-800nm. They argued that the abundance of sodium in the atmosphere is depleted above the 3mbar level either by condensation into Na2S clouds or ionization. We note that the detection of Si2+ in the thermosphere (Linsky et al., 2010) constrains cloud formation mechanisms in the upper atmosphere and implies that the depletion of Na at low pressures is probably due to ionization (see Section 3.3). The atmosphere of HD209458b has also been observed several times in the infrared with the Spitzer space telescope. Deming et al. (2005) detected the secondary eclipse of the planet at 24μm by using the Multiband Imaging Photometer (MIPS). Together with similar observations of TrES-1 at 4.5 and 8.0μm obtained by Charbonneau et al. (2005) who used the Infrared Array Camera (IRAC), these observations constitute the first detections of infrared emission from extrasolar planets. They were followed by Richardson et al. (2007) who observed the infrared emission spectrum of HD209458b between 7.5 and 13.2μm with the Infrared Spectrograph (IRS). This spectrum was reanalyzed by Swain et al. (2008) who noted that it is largely featureless with some evidence for an unidentified spectral feature between 7.5 and 8.5μm. Knutson et al. (2008) used IRAC to observe the secondary eclipse of HD209458b in the 3.6, 4.5, 5.8, and 8.0μm bands. They observed a higher than expected flux in the 4.5 and 5.8μm bands and interpreted this as evidence for the presence of a stratospheric temperature inversion that gives rise to strong water emission at these wavelengths. Beaulieu et al. (2010) observed the transit of the planet in the same wavelength bands and also found evidence for the presence of water vapor in the atmosphere. The detection of water vapor is also supported by Swain et al. (2009) who used the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) on HST to observe the secondary eclipse of HD209458b between 1.5 and 2.5μm. In addition to water vapor, the NICMOS observations revealed the presence of methane and carbon dioxide in the emission spectrum. These detections provide valuable clues to the overall composition of the atmosphere but the uncertainties in the data and degeneracies between temperature and abundances in the forward model prevent a more quantitative characterization of the density and temperature profiles. In general, difficulties associated with reducing the data and the need to describe a few uncertain data points with models of growing complexity has led to disagreements on the analysis and interpretation of transmission and secondary eclipse data on different exoplanets. The same is true of the FUV transit observations of HD209458b. 