Energetic electron observations of Rhea's magnetospheric interaction  Highlights ► We give a detailed review of an energetic electron dataset in a lunar-type interaction. ► A local transport process occurs in the wake of Rhea. ► The transport is associated to a flute type of instability driven by pressure gradients. ► We show that surface charging is an important element of the interaction. Abstract Saturn's moon Rhea is thought to be a simple plasma absorber, however, energetic particle observations in its vicinity show a variety of unexpected and complex interaction features that do not conform with our current understanding about plasma absorbing interactions. Energetic electron data are especially interesting, as they contain a series of broad and narrow flux depletions on either side of the moon's wake. The association of these dropouts with absorption by dust and boulders orbiting within Rhea's Hill sphere was suggested but subsequently not confirmed, so in this study we review data from all four Cassini flybys of Rhea to date seeking evidence for alternative processes operating within the moon's interaction region. We focus on energetic electron observations, which we put in context with magnetometer, cold plasma density and energetic ion data. All flybys have unique features, but here we only focus on several structures that are consistently observed. The most interesting common feature is that of narrow dropouts in energetic electron fluxes, visible near the wake flanks. These are typically seen together with narrow flux enhancements inside the wake. A phase-space-density analysis for these structures from the first Rhea flyby (R1) shows that Liouville's theorem holds, suggesting that they may be forming due to rapid transport of energetic electrons from the magnetosphere to the wake, through narrow channels. A series of possibilities are considered to explain this transport process. We examined whether complex energetic electron drifts in the interaction region of a plasma absorbing moon (modeled through a hybrid simulation code) may allow such a transport. With the exception of several features (e.g. broadening of the central wake with increasing electron energy), most of the commonly observed interaction signatures in energetic electrons (including the narrow structures) were not reproduced. Additional dynamical processes, not simulated by the hybrid code, should be considered in order to explain the data. For the small scale features, the possibility that a flute (interchange) instability acts on the electrons is discussed. This instability is probably driven by strong gradients in the plasma pressure and the magnetic field magnitude: magnetometer observations show clearly signatures consistent with the (expected) plasma pressure loss due to ion absorption at Rhea. Another potential driver of the instability could have been gradients in the cold plasma density, which are, however, surprisingly absent from most crossings of Rhea's plasma wake. The lack of a density depletion in Rhea's wake suggests the presence of a local cold plasma source region. Hybrid plasma simulations show that this source cannot be the ionized component of Rhea's weak exosphere. It is probably related to accelerated photoelectrons from the moon's negatively charged surface, indicating that surface charging may play a very important role in shaping Rhea's magnetospheric interaction region.  Introduction Rhea is Saturn's largest icy moon (radius: 1RRh=764km). It orbits the planet on an equatorial and circular orbit at a distance of about 8.74Rs from its center (1Rs=60,268km). Recent studies showed that Rhea is surrounded by a tenuous exosphere composed of oxygen and carbon dioxide (Teolis et al., 2010). Despite that, the main interaction mode of Rhea with the magnetosphere was shown to be plasma absorption. Magnetic field perturbations in Rhea's interaction region appear to be guided primarily by the formation of a plasma pressure cavity (wake) downstream of the moon and not from mass or momentum loading from the ionized products of this weak exosphere (Simon et al., 2012; Khurana et al., 2008; Roussos et al., 2008). The interaction region of any plasma absorbing moon is typically located downstream of the moon with respect to the direction of the bulk plasma flow. Depending of the upstream sonic Mach number, Ms, the opening angle of the plasma wake can vary along the magnetic field direction (low/high for large/small Ms) (Samir et al., 1983). For very low Mach numbers (e.g. Saturn's moons) the outer flanks of the plasma cavity tend to become tangential to the surface of the plasma absorbing body (Khurana et al., 2008). Perpendicular to the magnetic field (or to the flux tube enclosing the wake) the width of the cavity is approximately equal to the moon's diameter. The extension of the wake downstream of the moon also appears to be associated with the sonic Mach number: for low Mach numbers, the cavity has a smaller extension than the typical, supersonic case of the lunar wake in the solar wind. Simulations indicate that Rhea's cold plasma wake should refill completely within a distance of about 10RRh downstream (Simon et al., 2012; Roussos et al., 2008). The strongest electric and magnetic field disturbances exist within the boundaries of the wake. Pressure gradient (diamagnetic) currents flowing along the wake boundaries or within the wake lead to a compression of the magnetic field, B, behind the moon. The requirement for the total pressure (magnetic and plasma) to remain constant is also an alternative (and equivalent) explanation for the presence of this B enhancement. The same diamagnetic currents lead to magnetic field perturbations on the two sides of the flux tube corridor enclosing the plasma wake. Khurana et al. (2008) calls these features "expansion fans", which at Rhea extend up to several moon radii on either side of the wake. The magnetic field magnitude (∣B∣) drops within these regions (see also Fig. 5 of Roussos et al. (2008)). While magnetometer data comply with this standard, lunar-type interaction concept, Cassini's energetic charged particle observations of the near-Rhea environment by MIMI/LEMMS (Krimigis et al., 2004) are rich in unusual interaction features (Jones et al., 2008). The first close downstream flyby on November 26, 2005 (termed R1), revealed broad energetic electron (20-100keV) flux dropouts extending almost 7-8 Rhea radii (RRh) on each side of Rhea's wake. Hints for a broad decrease in fluxes were also present in a more distant 2007 downstream, non-targetted flyby of Rhea that took place on August 30, 2007 (informally termed R1.5). In addition to the broad regions of energetic electron flux dropouts, Cassini's MIMI/LEMMS detector recorded smaller scale dropouts each of which was few tens of km across. These were detected just outside the wake boundaries (wake flanks), within 2RRh from the center of the moon, in both the saturnward and the antisaturnward sectors of the interaction region. As the scale size of the broad depletion region was, for both flybys, comparable to the size of Rhea's Hill sphere (the region where the moon's gravity dominates that of Saturn), it was proposed that Rhea was surrounded by a disk containing large grains. These grains served as an energetic electron sink. In view of this interpretation it was also suggested that part of these trapped grain populations were concentrated into one or more narrow ringlets around Rhea, which could have been the source of the smaller scale dropouts seen by MIMI/LEMMS. Other evidence, such as the broadening of these small dips with increasing electron energy (gyroradius effects) were not contrary to this possibility. Subsequent analysis and optical observations, however, ruled out these scenarios (Tiscareno et al., 2010). Features such as the similar spatial scales of the broad depletion regions with the size of Rhea's Hill sphere and the simultaneous presence of smaller scale dropouts near the moon appear to be coincidental. Since it appears unlikely that the explanation of the observations involves any absorbing medium around Rhea, answers to the problem should invoke plasma or magnetospheric processes. Since the first two flybys in 2005 and 2007, two more have taken place on March 2, 2010 (R2) and January 11, 2011 (R3). The goal of this work is to primarily review and describe MIMI/LEMMS energetic electron observations from all Rhea close flybys, to put them in context with observations and findings from other Cassini instruments and to focus on common interaction signatures that can be identified among the different flybys. We will then propose interpretations that will help us form a more clear picture about the structure and the dynamics of the moon's interaction region and about the nature of the processes that drive some of the unusual energetic particle observations. Unique flyby features will not be explicitly analyzed in this work, but they will be identified mostly for reference in future studies. 