Chemical weathering and provenance evolution of Holocene-Recent sediments from the Western Indus Shelf, Northern Arabian Sea inferred from physical and mineralogical properties  Abstract We present a multi-proxy mineral record based on X-ray diffraction and diffuse reflectance spectrophotometry analysis for two cores from the western Indus Shelf in order to reconstruct changing weathering intensities, sediment transport, and provenance variations since 13ka. Core Indus-10 is located northwest of the Indus Canyon and exhibits fluctuations in smectite/(illite+chlorite) ratios that correlate with monsoon intensity. Higher smectite/(illite+chlorite) and lower illite crystallinity, normally associated with stronger weathering, peaked during the Early-Mid Holocene, the period of maximum summer monsoon. Hematite/goethite and magnetic susceptibility do not show clear co-variation, although they both increase at Indus-10 after 10ka, as the monsoon weakened. At Indus-23, located on a clinoform just west of the canyon, hematite/goethite increased during a period of monsoon strengthening from 10 to 8ka, consistent with increased seasonality and/or reworking of sediment deposited prior to or during the glacial maximum. After 2ka terrigenous sediment accumulation rates in both cores increased together with redness and hematite/goethite, which we attribute to widespread cultivation of the floodplain triggering reworking, especially after 200years ago. Over Holocene timescales sediment composition and mineralogy in two localities on the high-energy shelf were controlled by varying degrees of reworking, as well as climatically modulated chemical weathering. Highlights ► We examine a high resolution multi-proxy physical properties from two marine cores. ► Little correlation between physical proxies and climate in early Holocene ► Reworking probable cause of poor correlation in Early Holocene ► Possible anthropogenic influence on sedimentation in the last 200 years  Introduction Understanding how climate change affects continental environments and weathering processes is a key component of quantifying solid Earth-climate interactions. Analysis of marine sediments holds out the prospect of being able to reconstruct this evolution over a number of timescales (e.g., Debrabant et al., 1993; Fagel et al., 1994; Colin et al., 1999; Abrajevitch et al., 2009). Geochemical analysis of Arabian Sea sediment has attracted significant interest from those seeking to reconstruct changing chemical weathering and provenance during the Cenozoic, over various timescales through analysis of elemental ratios or isotopic systems (e.g., Papavassiliou and Cosgrove, 1982; Suczek and Ingersoll, 1985; Fagel et al., 1994; Sirocko et al., 2000; Staubwasser and Sirocko, 2001; Clift and Blusztajn, 2005; Colin et al., 2006; Limmer et al., 2012). However, there has been limited interest in the physical and mineralogical properties of sediments in the Northern Arabian Sea over any timescale, especially during the Holocene to Recent, despite the relatively well-defined variability in climate and sea level known for this period. This lack of data is despite the fact that physical and mineralogical properties have been shown to be effective in tracing sediment transport in several areas worldwide (e.g., Balsam et al., 1995; Liu et al., 2003; Adler et al., 2009). The lack of a mineralogical record limits our ability to understand the impact that changing monsoon intensity has had on sediment composition sourced from a drainage basin with a strong erosional signal. Mineralogy has been studied on the deep sea Indus Fan, but this has been starved of sediment since 11.5ka (Prins et al., 2000) and contains no record spanning the Holocene, where we have the best climate records. Prior to 1947 under more natural conditions the Indus River delivered between 250 and 675milliontonnes of sediment to the Indus Delta annually (Milliman et al., 1984; Giosan et al., 2006) while since that time discharge has fallen sharply because of damming (Inam et al., 2007). However, it is possible that some anthropogenic impact on sediment flux occurred earlier starting with the agriculture of the Harappan Civilization, ~5ka (Possehl, 1999). The Indus Shelf provides a potential archive for tracking changes in sediment discharge from the river and relating this to changing conditions in the onshore flood plain. The sediment record since the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) is the target of this study reflecting the fact that this period has the best defined monsoon climate record derived from oceanographic upwelling records (Gupta et al., 2003), from speleothems (Fleitmann et al., 2003) and from lacustrine records in western India (Enzel et al., 1999). The aim of this paper is to understand how evolving climate and sea level may have affected chemical weathering, as well sediment transport pathways and sources to the western shelf of the Indus delta (Fig. 1). We do this through examination of the physical properties and clay mineralogy of sediments deposited in that region. We focus on two Holocene-Recent cores taken from the Indus Shelf, which have already been the subject of a separate geochemical, weathering response and provenance study by Limmer et al. (2012). That study highlighted the importance of long-shore currents and the reworking of older sediment on the shelf, as well as direct supply from the Indus River in accounting for the sediment flux to the shelf during the Holocene. Applying a multi-proxy approach yields information about the transport, depositional history and origin of sediment on the Western Indus Shelf that cannot be obtained through analysis of individual sample methods. Moreover, application of continuous sensing methods allows rapid, cm-scale fluctuations to be examined in a way not possible with conventional geochemistry. The relative ease and low cost of sample preparation means a much larger and more complete dataset can be produced relatively quickly. We test the hypothesis that clay mineralogy, magnetic susceptibility and diffuse reflectance spectrophotometry can record changes in terrigenous sediment supply from the Indus River. We present a complete record of western Indus Shelf sedimentation based on whole core analysis and sampling. We use this record to investigate how sedimentation has changed in response to changes in monsoon strength and sea level. 