Magnetosphere-atmosphere coupling at Saturn: 1 - Response of thermosphere and ionosphere to steady state polar forcing  Highlights ► We self-consistently calculate Saturn magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere coupling. ► Magnetospheric energy controls flow of mass and energy in Saturn's thermosphere. ► Thermospheric dynamics are key to understanding high latitude energy balance. ► H3+ observations combined with our simulations may constrain H2 (v⩾4) abundances. Abstract We present comprehensive calculations of the steady state response of Saturn's coupled thermosphere-ionosphere to forcing by solar radiation, magnetospheric energetic electron precipitation and high latitude electric fields caused by sub-corotation of magnetospheric plasma. Significant additions to the physical processes calculated in our Saturn Thermosphere Ionosphere General Circulation Model (STIM-GCM) include the comprehensive and self-consistent treatment of neutral-ion dynamical coupling and the use of self-consistently calculated rates of plasma production from incident energetic electrons. Our simulations successfully reproduce the observed high latitude temperatures as well as the latitudinal variations of ionospheric peak electron densities that have been observed by the Cassini Radio Science Subsystem experiment (RSS). We find magnetospheric energy deposition to strongly control the flow of mass and energy in the high and mid-latitude thermosphere and thermospheric dynamics to play a crucial role in driving this flow, highlighting the importance of including dynamics in any high latitude energy balance studies on Saturn and other Gas Giants. By relating observed H3+ column emissions and temperatures to the same quantities inferred from simulated atmosphere profiles we identify a potential method of better constraining the still unknown abundance of vibrationally excited H2 which strongly affects the H3+ densities. Our calculations also suggest that local time variability in H3+ column emission flux may be largely driven by local time changes of H3+ densities rather than temperatures. By exploring the parameter space of possible high latitude electric field strengths and incident energetic electron fluxes, we determine the response of thermospheric polar temperatures to a range of these magnetospheric forcing parameters, illustrating that 10keV electron fluxes of 0.1-1.2mWm-2 in combination with electric field strengths of 80-100mVm-1 produce H3+ emissions consistent with observations. Our calculations highlight the importance of considering thermospheric temperatures as one of the constraints when examining the state of Saturn's magnetosphere and its coupling to the upper atmosphere.  Introduction For the Gas Giants in our Solar System the coupling between magnetospheres and atmospheres is likely to play a key role for the energy and momentum balance of their thermospheres and ionospheres. While the same can be said to be the case at polar latitudes on Earth, its global energy balance due to closer proximity to the Sun is most of the time dominated by solar heating. Magnetospheric forcing on Earth is controlled by the interaction between the solar wind and magnetosphere via the Dungey cycle (Dungey, 1961), while on Jupiter the planet's rotation represents the primary generator of electric fields and driver of magnetospheric currents which ultimately lead to auroral emissions and enhanced ionospheric Pedersen and Hall currents (e.g., Clarke et al., 2004, Cowley et al., 2004, Bougher et al., 2005). On Saturn, evidence from auroral observations indicates that planetary rotation and solar wind both play a role, though their exact relative importance is still subject of debate (Clarke et al., 2009). As first described by Hill (1979), corotation of magnetospheric plasma with a Gas Giant Planet such as Jupiter and Saturn is ultimately ensured by transfer of angular momentum from the upper atmosphere to the magnetosphere via a system of field-aligned Birkeland currents. In the magnetosphere the Birkeland current system is closed via radial currents in the equatorial plane which via j×B accelerations drive the plasma towards corotation. In the ionosphere the Birkeland currents close predominantly via field-perpendicular Pedersen currents which exert westward (against the sense of planetary rotation) acceleration on the ionospheric plasma and, via ion-neutral collisions, onto thermospheric neutrals. The upper atmosphere at auroral latitudes where this coupling occurs will thus corotate to a lesser extent with the planet which, in the rotating frame of the planet, is manifested via westward wind velocities in the thermosphere. Furthermore, the Pedersen and Hall currents cause thermal heating, often referred to as Joule heating, due to the ionosphere's resistivity. Using a radial profile of magnetospheric plasma velocities inferred from Voyager plasma observations and assuming fixed ionospheric conductances of 1mho, Cowley et al. (2004) calculated the associated field aligned currents and resulting ionospheric Joule heating rates of around 2.5TW per hemisphere, considerably larger than energy from the direct precipitation of electrons (globally ⩽0.06TW) and solar EUV heating (globally 0.15-0.27TW) (Müller-Wodarg et al., 2006). Using simultaneous observations of fields and plasmas in Saturn's magnetosphere from Cassini and UV images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Cowley et al. (2008) confirmed their earlier general results but revised the assumed conductances in the southern (summer-) hemisphere up from 1 to 4mho. Signatures of magnetosphere-atmosphere coupling are the auroral emissions that have been studied on Saturn in the EUV and FUV (emitted by H, H2) and in the IR (emitted by H3+) (Kurth et al., 2009; Melin et al., 2011). The EUV/FUV emissions are associated primarily with energetic electron precipitation at energies ranging from 5 to 30keV (Sandel et al., 1982; Gérard et al., 2004; Gustin et al., 2009; Lamy et al., 2010). Galand et al. (2011) studied the response of Saturn's ionosphere to precipitation of hard (10keV) and soft (500eV) electrons using their suprathermal electron transport code. They self-consistently calculated the ionisation rates and used these as input to the ionospheric model of Moore et al. (2010) to infer the resulting profiles of ion and electron densities. Galand et al. (2011) calculated Pedersen and Hall conductances as a function of precipitating particle energy and energy flux, deriving a square-root dependency of the conductances to energy flux for hard electrons. They also found the soft electrons to be important as a source of thermal electron heating but to have a minor influence upon the conductances. The present study investigates magnetosphere-atmosphere coupling, specifically its effects on Saturn's polar thermosphere and ionosphere. Our goal is to present a comprehensive assessment of the effects of magnetospheric currents on temperatures, dynamics and composition. Using a global model of Saturn's coupled thermosphere and ionosphere (Moore et al., 2004, 2010; Müller-Wodarg et al., 2006; Galand et al., 2009, 2011), we self-consistently calculate for the first time the response of the coupled thermosphere-ionosphere system to a range of values for energetic particle precipitation flux and high latitude electric fields. Through comparisons of our calculations with observed thermospheric temperatures, we define the ranges of magnetospheric parameters that are consistent with atmospheric observations, thereby presenting a framework for using the atmosphere as an additional constraint in quantitatively describing Saturn's coupled magnetosphere/atmosphere system. Our study extends the work of Galand et al. (2011) in that it calculates the response of the neutral atmosphere to changing conductances, while their calculations had assumed a constant background neutral atmosphere. Our calculations show that thermospheric dynamics are crucial in determining the thermal structure in the polar atmosphere, highlighting the limitation of any 1-D thermal balance calculation which cannot include horizontal and resulting vertical dynamics. In Section 2 we introduce the model and provide in Section 2.5 an overview of the simulation input parameters. Results for key physical quantities are presented in Section 3 alongside comparisons with observations. We provide a broader discussion of our findings including the limitations of our approach in Section 4. 