Minority carrier lifetime in silicon photovoltaics: The effect of oxygen precipitation  Abstract Single-crystal Czochralski silicon used for photovoltaics is typically supersaturated with interstitial oxygen at temperatures just below the melting point. Oxide precipitates therefore can form during ingot cooling and cell processing, and nucleation sites are typically vacancy-rich regions. Oxygen precipitation gives rise to recombination centres, which can reduce cell efficiencies by as much as 4% (absolute). We have studied the recombination behaviour in p-type and n-type monocrystalline silicon with a range of doping levels intentionally processed to contain oxide precipitates with a range of densities, sizes and morphologies. We analyse injection-dependent minority carrier lifetime measurements to give a full parameterisation of the recombination activity in terms of Shockley-Read-Hall statistics. We intentionally contaminate specimens with iron, and show recombination activity arises from iron segregated to oxide precipitates and surrounding defects. We find that phosphorus diffusion gettering reduces the recombination activity of the precipitates to some extent. We also find that bulk iron is preferentially gettered to the phosphorus diffused layer rather than to oxide precipitates. Highlights • Oxygen precipitation reduces absolute efficiency of silicon solar cells by up to 4%. • Full parameterisation of minority carrier lifetime due to oxide precipitates. • Iron contamination of oxide precipitates increases recombination activity. • Recombination activity reduced by phosphorus diffusion gettering. • Bulk iron gettered to phosphorus diffused layer, not oxide precipitates.  Introduction At present the majority of solar cells are made from bulk crystalline silicon. Minority carrier lifetime is the main parameter used to assess the quality of wafers from which cells are produced. For a given generation rate, the minority carrier lifetime is largely determined by recombination processes. Some recombination is intrinsic (band-to-band and Auger), while other is determined by defects in the bulk or at surfaces. It is necessary to understand which defects are typically present in solar wafers before processing, and what effect processing has on those defects. Moreover, it is important to understand the mechanism by which the relevant defects give rise to recombination, as well as to quantify their recombination activity. Monocrystalline Czochralski silicon (Cz-Si) typically contains ~1018cm-3 of interstitial oxygen, which is mainly incorporated from the silica crucible which contains the melt. This level of oxygen is supersaturated below ∼1200°C, so the equilibrium state is reached by the formation of SiO2 particles (oxide precipitates) [1]. The morphology of such particles changes as they grow, from unstrained particles initially, to strained precipitates, which are eventually surrounded by dislocations and sometimes stacking faults [2,3]. The first stage in precipitation is nucleation, and the rate of this is strongly enhanced by the presence of crystal defects. In modern Cz-Si used for integrated circuits the grown-in defect concentration is insufficient for oxygen precipitation to occur unintentionally. However, even in the highest quality Cz-Si, oxide precipitates can nucleate upon prolonged annealing at 650°C to 850°C [1,4]. In silicon for microelectronics thermal processes are often used to force oxygen precipitation to provide gettering centres for harmful metallic contaminants [5,6]. For photovoltaics, the Cz-Si wafers used are often of lower crystal quality, and several studies have found concentric rings of oxide precipitates in wafers or cells after growth or processing [7-10]. It is also noted that oxygen precipitation occurs at dislocations in multicrystalline silicon (mc-Si) during ingot cooling [11-13]. The undesirable precipitation of oxygen in Cz-Si is not a new problem, having been widely studied (and essentially solved) in Cz-Si for integrated circuits. Oxide precipitates are known to form in vacancy-rich regions [14]. The formation of such regions can be essentially eliminated by carefully controlling the so-called v/G criterion (where v is the crystal growth rate and G is the near-interface temperature gradient) [15]. Although it is possible to reduce intrinsic point defect concentrations to levels which are essentially negligible, doing so requires slow growth rates and these are not always compatible with the commercial constraints of the silicon photovoltaics industry. Thus, although the problem can in principle be eliminated, the fact is many commercial Cz-Si solar wafers do contain vacancy-rich regions in which oxide precipitates form [7-9]. Oxide precipitates have been linked to a substantial detrimental impact on conversion efficiencies in silicon solar cells [7,16]. A study by Haunschild et al. associated oxide precipitates with a 4% (absolute) efficiency reduction [7]. Interestingly, they found that the recombination activity to be strongly affected by a 10s anneal at 800°C. This, and earlier studies on iron-contaminated samples [17,18], suggests that impurities might play a role in the recombination mechanism. The aim of this paper is to answer some open questions regarding the effects of oxygen precipitation in silicon photovoltaics. 