In situ investigations of Fe3+ induced complexation of adsorbed Mefp-1 protein film on iron substrate  Graphical abstract Highlights • Pure iron was used as substrate for study of mussel adhesive protein adsorption. • Multianalytical in situ studies of the protein film forming and complexation. • Spectroscopy analysis was assisted by ab initial computational modeling. • Details of the film formation, structure, property, and compaction mechanism. • Tri-catechol/Fe3+ complexation leads to compaction of the surface protein film. Abstract A range of in situ analytical techniques and theoretical calculations were applied to gain insights into the formation and properties of the Mefp-1 film on iron substrate, as well as the protein complexation with Fe3+ ions. Adsorption kinetics of Mefp-1 and the complexation were investigated using QCM-D. The results suggest an initially fast adsorption, with the molecules oriented preferentially parallel to the surface, followed by a structural change within the film leading to molecules extending toward solution. Exposure to a diluted FeCl3 solution results in enhanced complexation within the adsorbed protein film, leading to water removal and film compaction. In situ Peak Force Tapping AFM was employed for determining morphology and nano-mechanical properties of the surface layer. The results, in agreement with the QCM-D observations, demonstrate that addition of Fe3+ induces a transition from an extended and soft protein layer to a denser and stiffer one. Further, in situ ATR-FTIR and Confocal Raman Micro-spectroscopy (CRM) techniques were utilized to monitor compositional/structural changes in the surface layer due to addition of Fe3+ ions. The spectroscopic analyses assisted by DFT calculations provide evidence for formation of tri-Fe3+/catechol complexes in the surface film, which is enhanced by Fe3+ addition.  Introduction In recent years, mussel adhesive proteins (MAPs) excreted from marine mussels have gained great interest in the scientific community for their film forming ability on various substrates. Currently, at least five different proteins (Mefp-1 to Mefp-5: denotation for Mytilus edulis foot protein hereafter) from the blue mussels have been isolated and characterized [1,2]. Mefp-1 was the first one to be purified, and it is regarded as the primary component of the cuticle of Mytilid treads. Mefp-1 contains a high level of peptides with catecholic functional groups present in the primary structure as peptidyl (3,4-di-hydroxypheny)-l-alanine (DOPA) [3-7,2,1]. The coherent accumulation of Mefp-1 and Fe3+ has been confirmed in the cuticle of Mytilid byssus, and Fe3+ is an integral part of the cuticle that provides exceptional stability due to formation of Fe3+/DOPA complexes [8-11]. DOPA is a bi-dentate, each Fe3+ ion can bind one, two, or three DOPA ligands, depending mainly on the pH and the Fe3+/DOPA ratio [12,13]. Complexation has been reported to occur at Fe3+ concentration as low as 10μM, and the Fe3+ ions provide significant and fully reversible intermolecular bridging of Mefp-1 layers on mica surfaces, forming multivalent tri-Fe3+/DOPA complexes [13]. Metal-mediated bridging of Mefp-1 films has considerable potential for its non-toxic and multifunctional properties. Due to the increasing interest of industries, including biomedical and medical oriented industry, the detailed understanding of the complexation process of Mefp-1 and Fe3+ on different material surfaces becomes more crucial. Some investigations of the Mefp-1/Fe3+ complexation have been performed in vitro [11,14,15], and Fe3+ induced bridging in Mefp-1 films on a model surface has been demonstrated by using ex situ techniques [13]. However, to the author's knowledge, no study has described Mefp-1/Fe3+ complexation on a base metal substrate using in situ analytical techniques. We have recently explored the possibility to use Mefp-1 for corrosion protection of carbon steel [16-18], and a deep understanding of the protein film formation and complexation process on iron substrate is of great importance for improving the protection performance of the adsorbed protein film. This study considers two issues related to Mefp-1 film formation on such substrates. The first is the adsorption kinetics of Mefp-1 on an oxidized iron substrate, which is more complex but more relevant for corrosion protection applications than inorganic or organic model surfaces used in other studies [19]. The other issue considered in this work is the composition and properties of the Fe3+ bridged Mefp-1 film formed on the iron substrate. To gain relevant information, we have utilized quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitor (QCM-D), in situ AFM, in situ attenuated total reflectance Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), in situ Confocal Raman Micro-spectroscopy (CRM) for the measurements, and also density functional theory (DFT) calculations to assist the interpretation of spectroscopic data. The QCM-D offers information on adsorption kinetics, adsorbed mass including trapped water, and the viscous and elastic properties of adsorbed layers [20]. This technique has previously been used for Mefp-1 studies on model silica surfaces [19,21], whereas an oxidized iron surface was used in this study. In situ Peak Force tapping AFM measurements were performed to investigate the morphology and nano-mechanical properties of the adsorbed film. Further, in situ ATR-FTIR and in situ CRM were performed on the iron substrate to obtain chemical information of the adsorbed Mefp-1 film before and after exposure to aqueous solutions containing Fe3+ ions. 