Direct Comparison of Autologous and Allogeneic Transplantation of iPSC-Derived Neural Cells in the Brain of a Nonhuman Primate  Summary Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provide the potential for autologous transplantation using cells derived from a patient's own cells. However, the immunogenicity of iPSCs or their derivatives has been a matter of controversy, and up to now there has been no direct comparison of autologous and allogeneic transplantation in the brains of humans or nonhuman primates. Here, using nonhuman primates, we found that the autologous transplantation of iPSC-derived neurons elicited only a minimal immune response in the brain. In contrast, the allografts caused an acquired immune response with the activation of microglia (IBA-1+/MHC class II+) and the infiltration of leukocytes (CD45+/CD3+). Consequently, a higher number of dopaminergic neurons survived in the autografts. Our results suggest that the autologous transplantation of iPSC-derived neural cells is advantageous for minimizing the immune response in the brain compared with allogeneic grafts. Graphical Abstract Highlights • iPSC-derived autografts cause only a minimal immune response in the primate brain • Autografts have advantages over allografts even at an immune-privileged site • Dopamine neurons survive even in allografts without immunosuppression The autologous transplantation of iPSC-derived neurons elicited only a minimal immune response in the brain. In contrast, the allografts caused an acquired immune response with the activation of microglia (IBA-1+/MHC class II+) and the infiltration of leukocytes (CD45+/CD3+). Autologous transplantation is advantageous for minimizing the immune response compared with allogeneic grafts.  Introduction In recent studies, murine induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived teratomas in the subcutaneous space induced an immune response in syngeneic mice (Zhao et al., 2011). In contrast, syngeneic transplantation of skin and bone marrow tissues (Araki et al., 2013) or endothelial, hepatic, and neuronal cells (Guha et al., 2013) derived from iPSCs showed a limited or no immune response, respectively. These rodent studies investigated the immunogenicity of teratomas, chimeric mouse-derived tissues, or ectopic grafts, but did not convincingly simulate the clinical situation. Parkinson's disease is one of the most promising targets for cell therapy with pluripotent stem cells, in which differentiated dopaminergic (DA) neurons are transplanted into the putamen of a patient's brain (Lindvall and Björklund, 2011). In order to assess the immunogenicity of iPSC-derived neural cells in a primate brain, we generated iPSCs from four cynomolgus monkeys and directly compared the autologous and allogeneic transplantation of iPSC-derived neural cells. 