The intake of inorganic arsenic from long grain rice and rice-based baby food in Finland - Low safety margin warrants follow up  Highlights • Inorganic arsenic was determined in long grain rice and rice-based baby food samples. • The inorganic arsenic intake from one source is close to the lowest BMDL0.1 value. • The cumulative intake assessment of inorganic arsenic is needed. Abstract We evaluated total and inorganic arsenic levels in long grain rice and rice based baby foods on Finnish market. Inorganic arsenic was analysed with an HPLC-ICP-MS system. The total arsenic concentration was determined with an ICP-MS method. In this study, the inorganic arsenic levels in long grain rice varied from 0.09 to 0.28mg/kg (n=8) and the total arsenic levels from 0.11 to 0.65mg/kg. There was a good correlation between the total and inorganic arsenic levels in long grain rice at a confidence level of 95%. The total arsenic levels of rice-based baby foods were in the range 0.02 - 0.29mg/kg (n=10), however, the level of inorganic arsenic could only be quantitated in four samples, on average they were 0.11mg/kg. Our estimation of inorganic arsenic intake from long grain rice and rice-based baby food in Finland indicate that in every age group the intake is close to the lowest BMDL0.1 value 0.3μg/kg bw/day set by EFSA. According to our data, the intake of inorganic arsenic should be more extensively evaluated.  Introduction Arsenic is a metalloid with a ubiquitous presence; it occurs in rock, soil, water, air and living organisms in inorganic and organic forms (Mandal & Suzuki, 2002; Naja & Volesky, 2009). The two inorganic forms are arsenite (As(III)) and arsenate (As(V)) and nowadays over fifty organic arsenic compounds have been discovered (Francesconi, 2010). The most abundant organic arsenic species are monomethylarsonic acid (MMA), dimethylarsonic acid (DMA), trimethylarsine oxide (TMAO), tetramethylarsonium ion (TeMA), arsenobetaine (AB), arsenocholine (AC), dimethylarsinylribosides, trimethylarsonioribosides, glycerylphosphorylarsenocholine and phosphatidylarsenocholine (Leermakers et al., 2006). According to the World Health Organization, arsenic, in one or another form, is found in virtually all foodstuffs (World Health Organization, 2001). The toxicity and metabolism of the distinct arsenic species are different (Huang, Ke, Costa, & Shi, 2004). Generally speaking, inorganic arsenic compounds are more toxic than organic ones, and the trivalent arsenic form is more toxic than its pentavalent equivalent (Hughes, 2002). It is difficult to determine the individual arsenic species in order of their toxicity, because the toxicity of these chemical forms is very different not only in different organisms but even between organs. One factor that makes arsenic more interesting is that arsenic is an essential element for some animals, like rats and goats (Püssa, 2008; Ratnaike, 2003) and interindividual susceptibility in humans to the adverse effects caused by arsenic compounds has been reported (Huang et al., 2004). The initiation and progression mechanisms of human carcinogenesis caused by arsenic exposure are still not entirely clear (Shi, Shi, & Liu, 2004). However, chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic not only causes, but also can evoke hypertension, skin lesions, diabetes and cardiovascular disease and furthermore it can affect the vascular system (Hughes, 2002; Jomova et al., 2011). Acute exposure to high levels of arsenic can cause cardiomyopathy, hypotension, gastrointestinal discomfort, vomiting, diarrhea, bloody urine, anuria, shock, convulsions, coma and in death in the most severe cases (Hughes, 2002; Jomova et al., 2011). According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) arsenic is a class I carcinogen (International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1987). In 2004 IARC declared that arsenic could cause lung, skin and urinary bladder cancer in humans (International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2004). In 2010, the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) estimated that BMDL0.5 for inorganic arsenic species would be 3μg/kg bw/day (Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 2010). This conclusion replaced the old PTWI-value for inorganic arsenic (15μg/kg bw/week) which had been established in 1989. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) set the BMDL0.1 value at 0.3 - 8μg/kg bw/day in 2010 (European Food Safety Authority, 2010). At present, there are no regulations about organic or inorganic arsenic species in food or beverages except for that in drinking water. In 1993, WHO provided a reference value of 10μg/L of total arsenic compounds in drinking water, previously the reference value had been set at 50μg/L (World Health Organization, 1993). In 2008 the Data Collection and Exposure Unit (DATEX) of EFSA collected information on the arsenic levels in food from the EU member states and Norway (EFSA, 2010). According to the DATEX survey, the total arsenic level was highest in fish and seafood and miscellaneous dietary products. The miscellaneous group consisted of diverse foodstuffs, e.g. algae, algae based food supplements, spices, herbs, different baby foods and formulas. It is well-known that a significant part of total arsenic in fish and seafood exists in the organic arsenic forms, particularly arsenobetaine (Nam, Oh, Min, & Lee, 2010; Sloth, Larsen, & Julshamn, 2005; Suner et al., 2002) and in algae, as different forms of arsenosugars (Kohlmeyer, Kuballa, & Jantzen, 2002). Rice seem to contain higher levels of arsenic compounds than many other terrestrial plants or crops (Meharg et al., 2009; Williams et al., 2007). For example, the rice plant seems to be more effective in its ability to take up and translocate arsenite than oat and barley (Su, McGrath, & Zhao, 2010) and a significant amount of the total arsenic in rice exists in its inorganic forms (Heitkemper, Vela, Stewart, & Westphal, 2001; Nishimura et al., 2010). The amount of inorganic arsenic depends also on the cultivation site (Meharg et al., 2009; Williams et al., 2005). The People's Republic of China has set a maximum value for inorganic arsenic in rice of 0.15mg/kg (United States Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service, 2006). EFSA has stated that in EU member states the main dietary exposure to total arsenic is derived from fish and seafood, cereals and cereal products whereas inorganic arsenic intake is most often derived from cereals and cereals products (EFSA, 2010). In this category, rice is one of the main contributors to the inorganic arsenic intake due to its high level of total arsenic. Generally speaking, drinking water does not play any significant role in inorganic arsenic intake in the EU member states. The national Findiet 2007 survey revealed that 20% of working age men eat rice as a side dish and they consume 80±60g/day of rice (KTL-National Public Health Institute. Department of Health Promotion, 2008a). In men in the age group 65 - 74years the corresponding figures were 11% and 83±33g/day. Finnish women of their working age eat rice as a side dish somewhat less than men (17%); their consumption was 66±42g/day. Only ten percent of older women consume rice as a side dish; they eat on average 54±38g/day. "The Diet of Finnish Preschoolers" study showed that 0.6-50% of one to six years old girls consumed manufactured porridges (KTL-National Public Health Institute. Department of Health Promotion, 2008b). Typically the food group called "manufactured porridges" consists of water and milk based porridges both as powders and ready-made porridges. The girls were given porridge 171-280g a day. 1 - 50% of the boys aged one to four years were fed with manufactured porridges; their intake was in the range of 184 - 234g. Finnish children (1 - 6years old) can consume rice in forms other than porridges (wholegrain rice, rice noodles, rice-rye mixture); the amount vary from 20 to 47gday, although only a minority of this age group (7-24%) ate rice in forms other than porridges. According to the present knowledge of inorganic arsenic risk assessment, every exposure represents a risk (Meharg & Raab, 2010). The amount of rice consumed varies significantly in different countries. In 2009, the rice consumption was 4.40kg/capita/year (milled equivalent) in Finland whereas in the People's Republic of China it was much more, 76.30kg/capita/year (milled equivalent) (Food, 2012). However, with respect to arsenic intake the way of cooking significantly contributes to the arsenic intake originating from rice (Mihucz et al., 2007). According to EFSA's risk characterisation, children who are fed with rice-based baby formula may be exposed to a higher intake of inorganic arsenic than other consumers (EFSA, 2010). Based on that assessment, children under three years of age are believed to be exposed to between two to three times more inorganic arsenic than adults because children consume more food relative to their body weight than adults. The dietary exposure to inorganic arsenic in children under three years of age has been estimated to be 0.50 - 2.66μg/kg bw per day. These estimates are lower than BMDL0.1 values for those thought to be causing lung and bladder cancer as well for dermal lesions (0.3 - 8μg/kg bw per day). In Europe, the average dietary exposure to inorganic arsenic is in the range 0.13 - 0.56μg/kg bw per day; for high level adult consumers it is between 0.37 - 1.22μg/kg bw per day. However, in certain ethnic groups the exposure to inorganic arsenic can be higher, for example avid consumers of rice (certain ethnic groups) it can be 0.95μg/kg bw per day, in individuals eating a lot of algae-based products it can be as high as 4.03μg/kg bw per day. Nonetheless these values for exposure are still within the range of BMDL0.1 values. In this article we describe a fully validated method for the determination of total and inorganic arsenic in rice. We also assessed total and inorganic arsenic levels in long grain rice and rice-based baby food products on the Finnish market. This paper also performs a risk assessment for inorganic arsenic from long grain rice and rice based baby food in different age groups in Finland. 