Direct observation of solute-dislocation interaction on screw dislocation in a neutron irradiated modified 316 stainless steel  Abstract A three-dimensional atom probe (3DAP) technique was used to observe the three-dimensional solute distribution around screw dislocations in neutron-irradiated modified 316 austenitic stainless steel. Si, Ni, and P were observed to get enriched around the cores of screw dislocations, while Fe, Cr, Mn, and Mo were depleted in the same areas. Si was segregated to a narrow region in the core for which, it was concluded that Si was trapped in the initial stage of segregation. Other enriched elements segregated to some edge features such as kinks and/or jogs formed as a result of Si trapping. The results suggest that solute-dislocation interaction of screw dislocations was similar to radiation-induced segregation, which is affected by the volume size factor of solute atoms. Highlights • We observed screw dislocations in an irradiated 316 austenitic stainless steel by 3DAP. • Solute segregation around screw dislocation core was similar to radiation induced segregation. • Solute dislocation interaction on screw dislocations is affected by volume size factor. • Segregation behavior at screw dislocations suggests that a mixed dumb-bell mechanism occurred.  Introduction It has been widely accepted that dislocations act as sinks for point defects and defect clusters. Especially, edge dislocations are controlled by irradiation defects due to the interstitial bias of the sink [1,2]. Edge dislocations have hydrostatic stress fields around their core; therefore, it absorbs the point defects easily. While, there are no hydrostatic stress fields around the cores of screw dislocations. Thus, it is presumed that a driving force for moving point defects to the core of a screw dislocation does not exist. Because of these differences in the stress fields around the cores, the sink strength for a point defect is thought to be weaker than that for an edge dislocation. However, the mechanism for the screw dislocation acting as a sink for point defects can be found indirectly, e.g., it is known that the absorption of either interstitials or vacancies at a screw dislocation changes it to a helical dislocation having partial edge component [3,4]. Therefore, the core of the screw dislocation is considered to form kinks or jogs with an edge component, which shows interstitial bias. Such kinks or jogs would enhance the transformation from screw to helical dislocation. Irradiation softening is caused by such increase in the edge component. This increase results in a large degree of softening in bcc metals because the Peierls stress rapidly increases at low temperature [5,6]. In this way, screw dislocations are considered to have a significant influence on the formation of defects during irradiation, and the resulting mechanical properties increases edge components as a result of solute-dislocation interactions. Using conventional methods, it is difficult to analyze solute atoms trapped at the core of dislocations, and it is also difficult to clarify which solute atom is dominant in the solute-screw dislocation interactions. In a recent study, we succeeded in clearly visualizing in three-dimension, the solute segregation to the extended edge dislocations and proved solute segregation to stacking faults and Shockley partial dislocations in a neutron irradiated modified 316 stainless steel by using three-dimensional atom probe (3DAP) [7]. In this study, we apply the method to liner screw dislocations to discuss the solute-screw dislocation interaction under neutron irradiation. 