Synthesis, spectroscopic, coordination and biological activities of some organometallic complexes derived from thio-Schiff base ligands  Graphical abstract Synthesis, spectroscopic, coordination and biological activities of some organometallic complexes derived from thio-Schiff base ligands Highlights • Thio Schiff base complexes derived from mono- and diacetyl ferrocene were synthesized. • The complexes are characterized by different spectroscopic techniques. • The complexes have different varieties of geometrical structures. • Biochemical studies were studied. Abstract Two series of mono- and binuclear complexes cyclic or acyclic thio-ferocine Schiff base ligands, derived from the condensation of 2-aminobenzenthiol (L) with monoacetyl ferrocene in the molar ratio 1:1 or in the molar ratio 1:2 for diacetyl ferocine have been prepared. The condensation reactions yield the corresponding Schiff Base ligands, HLa-Maf and H2Lb-Daf. The chelation of the ligands to metal ions occurs through the sulfur of the thiol group as well as the nitrogen atoms of the azomethine group of the ligands. HLa-Maf acts as monobasic bidentate or dibasic tetradentate, while H2Lb-Daf behaves as twice negatively cargend tetradentate ligand. The structures of these ligands were elucidated by elemental analysis, infrared, ultraviolet-visible spectra, as well as 1H NMR spectra. Reactions of the Schiff bases ligands with ruthenium(III), oxovanadium(IV) and dioxouranium(VI) afforded the corresponding transition metal complexes. The properties of the newly prepared complexes were analyse by elemental analyses, infrared, electronic spectra, 1H NMR as well as the magnetic susceptibility and conductivity measurement. The metal complexes exhibits different geometrical arrangements such as octahedral and square pyramidal coordination. Schiff base ligands and their metal complexes were tested against two pathogenic bacteria as Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria as well as one kind of fungi to study their biological activity. All the complexes exhibit antibacterial and antifungal activities against these organisms.  Introduction π-Conjugated organic molecular systems provide a wide range of possible substitution and functionality are of considerable interest because of their applications in biochemistry [1,2] asymmetric catalysis [3], organometalic chemistry [4-10] material science [11-13], electronic and photonic technologies relevant to optical computing applications [14]. The redox-active ferrocene moiety has also been exploited in the electrochemical sensing of anions; these receptors are expected to show cathodic shifts in their redox process when complexed to an anion [15-17]. Furthermore, It has been reported, [18,19] the use of platinum and gold complexes of 1,1′-bis(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene might be used successfully against various tumours. An enhanced antibiotic activity of penicillin and cephalosporine may be obtained by replacing the aromatic group with the ferrocenyl moiety [20,21]. In view of these facts, we have previously synthesized a new class of mono and disubstitutedferrocene-derived from thio-Schiff bases ligands and their coordination behaviour with different transition metals for which antimicrobial activities have been discussed [22]. In continuation of our work, two new series of cyclic or acyclic mono- or binuclear complexes have been prepared from thio-Schiff base ligands, HLa-Maf and H2Lb-Daf. The reaction of Schiff bases ligands with ruthenium(III), oxovanadium(IV) and dioxouranium(VI), affords a mono or binuclear complex of a cyclic or macrocyclic complexes, according to the mole ratio of metal to ligand. The Schiff base and their newly prepared metal complexes were identified by different physicochemical and spectroscopic techniques. The microbial activity of Schiff bases and their transition metal complexes have been investigated against two pathogenic bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus) as Gram-positive bacteria, and (Pseudomonas fluorescens) as Gram-negative bacteria in addition to one kind of fungi (Fusarium oxysporum) to assess their antimicrobial properties. 