Genetic Correction of Tauopathy Phenotypes in Neurons Derived from Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells  Summary Tauopathies represent a group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation of pathological TAU protein in brains. We report a human neuronal model of tauopathy derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying a TAU-A152T mutation. Using zinc-finger nuclease-mediated gene editing, we generated two isogenic iPSC lines: one with the mutation corrected, and another with the homozygous mutation engineered. The A152T mutation increased TAU fragmentation and phosphorylation, leading to neurodegeneration and especially axonal degeneration. These cellular phenotypes were consistent with those observed in a patient with TAU-A152T. Upon mutation correction, normal neuronal and axonal morphologies were restored, accompanied by decreases in TAU fragmentation and phosphorylation, whereas the severity of tauopathy was intensified in neurons with the homozygous mutation. These isogenic TAU-iPSC lines represent a critical advancement toward the accurate modeling and mechanistic study of tauopathies with human neurons and will be invaluable for drug-screening efforts and future cell-based therapies. Highlights • A human neuron model of tauopathy using TAU-A152T-iPSCs • Correction of TAU-A152T mutation eliminates tauopathy • Engineered homozygous TAU-A152T mutation intensifies tauopathy • A152T mutation increases TAU proteolysis, leading to tauopathy  Introduction Tauopathies are a group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the accumulation and aggregation of the pathological TAU protein in human brains (Hutton, 2000; Lee et al., 2001; Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2012; Vossel and Miller, 2008). TAU, encoded by the MAPT gene on chromosome 17, is a microtubule binding protein that is highly expressed in neurons and predominantly located in neuronal axons (Goedert et al., 1989; Kosik et al., 1989; Morris et al., 2011; Neve et al., 1986). Hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of TAU cause neurofibrillary pathologies, including tangles and neuropil threads that are often seen in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Hutton, 2000; Kosik et al., 1986; Lee et al., 2001; Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2012; Vossel and Miller, 2008). Tauopathies are also typical of other neurodegenerative disorders, including frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (Hutton, 2000; Lee et al., 2001; Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2012; Vossel and Miller, 2008). Most FTD and PSP cases are sporadic, but a minority are familial (Weder et al., 2007). FTD and PSP syndromes can be caused by mutations in the MAPT gene that result in abnormal TAU phosphorylation and aggregation, leading to neurodegeneration. Transgenic murine models of tauopathies have revealed fundamental insights into the disease (Lee et al., 2001; Mandelkow and Mandelkow, 2012), but their value as predictive preclinical models is unknown. In fact, many candidate drugs successful in rodent models of neurodegenerative diseases have failed in humans (Ashe and Zahs, 2010; Huang and Mucke, 2012). Thus, new humanized disease models, such as mutation- and patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), are urgently needed for further development of therapeutic strategies for tauopathies. Human iPSCs are a highly promising approach for investigating cellular properties of traditionally challenging neurodegenerative disorders (HD iPSC Consortium, 2012; Israel et al., 2012; Kondo et al., 2013; Park et al., 2008; Yamanaka, 2009). Because postmortem tissue represents late-stage disease, modeling tauopathy onset and progression are problematic with autopsy samples alone. iPSC-derived neurons grown in culture allow for the detection of specific molecular and temporal signatures from mutation-carrying patients, thereby improving our understanding of the pathogenesis of tauopathies. One limitation of using iPSCs is the inability to carry out studies under genetically defined conditions, leading to increased experimental variability. To overcome these obstacles, we used a zinc-finger-nuclease (ZFN)-mediated gene-editing technique (An et al., 2012; Corti et al., 2012; Li et al., 2012; Soldner et al., 2011) to generate isogenic human iPSC lines from an individual carrying a TAU-A152T mutation. We demonstrate that isogenic TAU-iPSCs are not only useful for modeling tauopathies, but also for identifying unknown molecular mechanisms underlying the disease-causing mutations. 