Aerodynamic and electrical evaluation of a VAWT farm control system with passive rectifiers and mutual DC-bus  Abstract A wind farm with a simple electrical topology based on passive rectifiers and a single inverter (mutual topology) is compared to a more complex topology where each turbine has a separate inverter (separate topology). In both cases, the turbines are controlled electrically by varying the extracted power with the rotational velocity as control signal. These two electrical topologies are evaluated with respect to the absorbed power for a farm of four turbines placed either on a line or in a square configuration. The evaluation is done with a vortex model for the aerodynamics, coupled with a model of the electromechanical system. Simulations predict that individual control is beneficial for aerodynamically independent turbines if the wind speeds differ significantly between the turbines. If the differences in wind speed are caused by one turbine operating in the wake of another, the deviations in power output between the topologies are less prominent. The mutual topology can even deliver more power than the separate topology when one turbine is in the wake of another turbine if the wind speed changes rapidly. Highlights • A VAWT farm is simulated with vortex model coupled with electric model. • An electric system with passive rectifiers and a mutual DC-bus has been evaluated. • The proposed electric system is viable for a vertical axis wind turbine farm. • The aerodynamic interactions between the turbines is important for the evaluation. • The inter turbine distance is far more important than the electrical topology.  Introduction Wind turbines are typically placed in farms where the turbines are in close proximity to each other. This can have economical benefits due to synergy effects such as common grid connection and infrastructure. The most common type of wind turbine is the horizontal axis turbine with active pitch control [1]. This work is devoted to the straight bladed vertical axis turbine without pitch control, whereby the rotational velocity is the only parameter left for control of the turbine. A comparison between the different design concepts is found in Ref. [2]. Pitch regulation for vertical axis turbines has previously been studied, see e.g. Refs. [3-5]. However, pitch is not considered here since it increases turbine complexity. The number of constructed wind farms with straight bladed vertical axis turbines is quite limited, hence limiting the amount of empirical results. Simulations of vertical axis turbine farms have indicated that such turbines can be placed relatively close to each other with good performance for quite a wide range of incoming wind directions [6-8]. The interaction between two turbines has been tested experimentally in a towing tank [9]. These simulations and experiments are limited to turbines at constant rotational velocity, while for a control system study, variations in wind speeds and rotational velocities for the different turbines are of interest. In Ref. [10], a control strategy where the extracted power is proportional to the cube of the wind speed was applied to a horizontal axis turbine. The simulations in Ref. [11] predict that a similar strategy should work for vertical axis turbines as well and this work is an extension of that work to turbine farms. Although a rectifier and an inverter for each turbine can be used, a less complex approach is to connect several turbines to the same inverter. This electrical system has been studied in Refs. [12-14] and several different electrical topologies have also been studied in Refs. [15-17]. All these studies focus on the electrical system of the farm, while the aerodynamic modelling is limited to prescribed power coefficients of the turbines. Further, all these studies only consider horizontal axis turbines. The present work considers vertical axis turbines and provides a more elaborate aerodynamic description. Time dependent aerodynamic simulations of the turbines are coupled with simulations of the electrical control system. The method includes the fluctuations in torque, which are characteristic to straight bladed vertical axis turbines. These torque fluctuations cause small variations in the rotational velocity of the turbines. The method also includes the mutual aerodynamic interaction of the turbines, making it possible to study the control system behaviour when one turbine is in the wake of another. The vertical axis wind turbine in this study is similar to the 200 kW turbine built by Vertical Wind AB [18], which has a turbine height of 24 m, diameter of 26 m and uses a permanent magnet (PM) synchronous generator. 