Structural studies of magnesium nitride fluorides by powder neutron diffraction  Abstract Samples of ternary nitride fluorides, Mg3NF3 and Mg2NF have been prepared by solid state reaction of Mg3N2 and MgF2 at 1323-1423K and investigated by powder X-ray and powder neutron diffraction techniques. Mg3NF3 is cubic (space group: Pm3m) and has a structure related to rock-salt MgO, but with one cation site vacant. Mg2NF is tetragonal (space group: I41/amd) and has an anti-LiFeO2 related structure. Both compounds are essentially ionic and form structures in which nitride and fluoride anions are crystallographically ordered. The nitride fluorides show temperature independent paramagnetic behaviour between 5 and 300K. Graphical abstract Definitive structures of the ternary magnesium nitride fluorides Mg3NF3 and the lower temperature polymorph of Mg2NF have been determined from powder neutron diffraction data. The nitride halides are essentially ionic and exhibit weak temperature independent paramagnetic behaviour. Highlights ► Definitive structures of Mg3NF3 and Mg2NF were determined by neutron diffraction. ► Nitride and fluoride anions are crystallographically ordered in both structures. ► Both compounds exhibit weak, temperature independent paramagnetic behaviour. ► The compounds are essentially ionic with ionicity increasing with F- content.  Introduction Metal nitride fluorides are a relatively unexplored class of inorganic materials [1,2]. Andersson referred to these as "pseudo-oxides" as they have compositions derived from oxides effectively by the substitution of O2- ions by N3- and F- ions [3]. The first examples of these were magnesium nitride fluorides prepared by Andersson [4,5] and three phases were reported which had structures related to the rocksalt structure of MgO. Mg3NF3 is cubic with N3- and F- crystallographically ordered and one quarter of the Mg2+ sites are empty in an ordered fashion. L-Mg2NF, a low temperature polymorph, is tetragonal with ordered anions and contains magnesium in square-pyramidal co-ordination. The high temperature polymorph, H-Mg2NF, is observed after treating L-Mg2NF at high temperature and pressure (1100-1350°C; 25-30kbar). It is cubic and isostructural with MgO with the N3- and F- anions disordered. Magnesium oxide, MgO, and related compounds have found considerable applications as refractory ceramics [6], catalyst supports [7-9] and recently as additives in the firing of biomass fuels [10]. Following the discovery of the magnesium nitride fluorides, investigations by Ehrlich et al. produced further alkaline earth metal compounds, Ca2NF, Sr2NF and Ba2NF, which were all reported from powder diffraction evidence to be isostructural with the respective group 2 rocksalt-type oxides [11]. Galy et al. also reported Ca2NF as a rocksalt structure from powder measurements [12]. More recent single crystal X-ray diffraction experiments have, however, identified alternative structures for some of these compounds. Nicklow et al. reported a Ca2NF phase isostructural with L-Mg2NF [13]. Under slightly different conditions the same group reported a Ca2NF phase with a structure in which the simple rock salt cubic cell parameter is doubled due to the anion ordering of N3- and F- [14]. This doubled, ordered rock salt-type structure is also observed for Sr2NF [15], but as one progresses further down group 2, single crystal studies reveal that the equivalent barium compound, Ba2NF, forms with a simple NaCl structure with disordered anions, in agreement with the earlier work of Ehrlich et al. [16]. Recently Ba2NF was reported to form also with a layered anti-α-NaFeO2 structure from powder neutron diffraction measurements [17]. This structure consists of a cubic close packed arrangement of Ba2+ cations, with the N3- and F- anions ordered over the octahedral interstices to produce alternating layers comprising either edge-sharing NBa6 or FBa6 octahedra-a structure type more usually observed for alkaline earth metal nitride chlorides, bromides and iodides [18]. Rare earth nitride fluorides were also discovered in the early 1970s. Tanguy et al. initially reported compounds in the solid solution LaNxF3-3x with a stability range x=0.34-0.54 [19]. Cerium forms an analogous solid solution CeNxF3-3x otherwise differing from La only in the solubility range (x=0.33-0.50) [20]. By contrast, Gadolinium forms only the line phase, Gd3NF6 [21] and more recently Pr3NF6 and Ce3NF6 were prepared and studied by neutron diffraction [22]. The structures of these compounds are related to fluorite, although all show an anion excess and for Ln=Ce and Pr, neutron diffraction has indicated the existence of fluorine interstitials. Variation in stoichiometry, structure and anion distribution within ternary nitride halide systems is likely to have profound effects on electronic properties, but reports on this are limited. DFT calculations performed by Fang et al. on compounds in the Mg-N-F ternary system show a decreasing band gap from insulating MgF2 (calculated direct band gap, Eg, of 6.8eV) through Mg3NF3 (Eg=3.6eV) and L-Mg2NF (Eg=2.1eV) to semiconducting Mg3N2 with a calculated direct band gap of 1.6eV (2.8eV experimentally) [23]. In this work we report the solid state synthesis of the nitride fluoride Mg3NF3 and the low temperature polymorph of the dimagnesium nitride fluoride, L-Mg2NF and provide detailed models of their crystal structures from powder neutron diffraction experiments. Powder neutron diffraction has allowed us to establish the distribution of nitride and fluoride in these "pseudo-oxides" without ambiguity and to draw conclusions as to the type of bonding in these compounds. We also report the magnetic behaviour of the nitride fluorides. 