Correlating Mediterranean shallow water deposits with global Oligocene-Miocene stratigraphy and oceanic events  Abstract Shallow-marine sediment records have the strong potential to display sensitive environmental changes in sedimentary geometries and skeletal content. However, the time resolution of most neritic carbonate records is not high enough to be compared with climatic events as recorded in the deep-sea sediment archives. In order to resolve the paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic changes during the Oligocene-Miocene transition in the Mediterranean shallow water carbonate systems with the best possible time resolution, we re-evaluated the Decontra section on the Maiella Platform (central Apennines, Italy), which acts as a reference for the correlation of Oligocene-Miocene shallow water deposits in the Mediterranean region. The 120-m-thick late Oligocene-late Miocene carbonate succession is composed of larger foraminiferal, bryozoan and corallinacean limestones interlayered with distinct planktonic foraminiferal carbonates representing a mostly outer neritic setting. Integrated multi-proxy and facies analyses indicate that CaCO3 and total organic carbon contents as well as gamma-ray display only local to regional processes on the carbonate platform and are not suited for stratigraphic correlation on a wider scale. In contrast, new biostratigraphic data correlate the Decontra stable carbon isotope record to the global deep-sea carbon isotope record. This links relative sea level fluctuations, which are reflected by facies and magnetic susceptibility changes, to third-order eustatic cycles. The new integrated bio-, chemo-, and sequence stratigraphic framework enables a more precise timing of environmental changes within the studied time interval and identifies Decontra as an important locality for correlating not only shallow and deep water sediments of the Mediterranean region but also on a global scale. Highlights • We establish a new age model for the Oligo-Miocene Decontra section. • The local carbon isotope record is correlated with the global δ13C curve. • This correlates Mediterranean shallow water records with oceanic/climatic events.  Introduction For stratigraphy of the Cenozoic Era, the Mediterranean is of peculiar meaning because nearly all stages are defined with their GSSPs in this region. These GSSPs were established in deep water successions, many of them in Italy, which have a complete record and planktonic fossils afford the necessary biostratigraphic resolution (Hilgen et al., 2012; Vandenberghe et al., 2012). More recently, this time resolution was distinctly enhanced by astrochronology, which allows to resolve at a scale of thousands of years (e.g., Shackleton et al., 2000; Hilgen et al., 2003; Iaccarino et al., 2004, 2011; Hilgen, 2008; Turco et al., 2011a). Due to this high time resolution and more stable environmental conditions paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic interpretations for the Cenozoic mainly rest on isotope studies of deep water deposits (e.g., Miller et al., 1991; Zachos et al., 2001; Billups and Schrag, 2003; Holbourn et al., 2007). In contrast to deep water successions, there is an intrinsic limitation regarding achievable age resolution of shallow water deposits (Mutti et al., 2010). Hence, Cenozoic shallow-marine sedimentary successions in the Mediterranean region are predominantly lithostratigraphically classified. Accurate chronostratigraphic correlations are generally impeded by the stratigraphically incomplete record and the less precise biostratigraphic resolution in shallow and marginal marine settings (Mutti et al., 2010). Accordingly, the stratigraphic distribution of specific heterozoan and chlorozoan carbonate facies associations in the central Mediterranean and their relationship to the Neogene climate trends and particular paleoceanographic conditions in the Mediterranean Sea mainly rely on δ13C records (Jacobs et al., 1996; Mutti et al., 1997, 1999, 2006; John et al., 2003; Kocsis et al., 2008; Brandano et al., 2010). However, a comparison between sections evidences specific regional offsets and, generally, an offset with the global carbon isotope record (Mutti et al., 1997, 1999; Brandano et al., 2010). Two main factors may explain these discrepancies between the Mediterranean shallow-marine and the global deep-sea isotope curves: (1) an inadequate or low resolution stratigraphy; or (2) the specific paleogeographic and paleoceanographic changes, which occur in this region during the Oligocene-Miocene (Pedley, 1987; Brandano and Corda, 2002; Bosellini and Perrin, 2008; Brandano et al., 2009a,b, 2010). The Maiella (Abruzzi, central Apennines, Italy) represents a tectonically relative stable carbonate platform in the central Mediterranean Sea (Vecsei and Sanders, 1997). Due to its isolated position (Mutti et al., 1999; Brandano et al., 2012) and long-term stratigraphic record of shallow water sediments (Vecsei and Sanders, 1997) this carbonate platform is well suited to identify local processes possibly overprinting regional or global signals in neritic carbonates. The Oligocene-Miocene Decontra section, at the northwestern platform margin, is a reference section for the correlation of Mediterranean shallow water deposits (Mutti et al., 1997, 1999, 2006; Brandano et al., 2010). To assess the influence of local vs. global factors in the Oligocene-Miocene central Mediterranean Sea, we re-evaluate the biostratigraphy as well as oxygen and carbon stable isotope trends from the Decontra section and complement the multi-proxy data set with CaCO3, total organic carbon, magnetic susceptibility and gamma-ray data. 