Soil structural responses to alterations in soil microbiota induced by the dilution method and mycorrhizal fungal inoculation  Abstract This investigation examines the effect of manipulating soil microbial community composition and species richness on the development of soil structure over a seven month period in planted (with or without mycorrhizal fungi) and in unplanted macrocosms. The dilution method effectively resulted in soil communities with consistently contrasting levels of species (TRF) richness. In particular, the 10-6 dilution of field soil resulted in less rich communities in bare unplanted soil than did the 10-1 soil dilution. However, this was not the case in planted soils where root activity was a powerful influence on species richness. After seven months, principal components analysis (PCA) separated bacterial community composition primarily on planting regime; planted mycorrhizal, planted non-mycorrhizal and bare soil treatments all contained different bacterial community compositions. A consistent finding in planted and unplanted soils was that aggregate stability was positively correlated with small pore sizes. Mycorrhizal colonisation decreased plant biomass and also resulted in reduced soil bacterial species richness, lower percentage organic matter and smaller pore sizes relative to planted but non-mycorrhizal soils. However, soil aggregate stability and water repellency were increased in these (mycorrhizal) soils probably due to AMF hyphal activities including enmeshment and/or glomalin production. In contrast, bacterial TRF richness was positively correlated with aggregate stability in the bare and non-mycorrhizal planted soils. Soil organic carbon was an important factor in all treatments, but in the bare soil where there was no additional input of labile C from roots, the percentage C could be directly related to fungal TRF richness. The less species rich bare soil contained more organic C than the more species rich bare soil. This suggests a degree of redundancy with regard to mineralisation of organic matter when additional, more utilisable C sources are unavailable. Understanding the effects of microbial diversity on functional parameters is important for advancing sustainable soil management techniques, but it is clear that soil is a dynamic ecosystem.  Introduction It is widely acknowledged that soil systems are extremely diverse and complex (Giller et al. 1997; Torsvik and Øvreås 2002; Fitter 2005). Estimates of numbers of bacteria inhabiting soil range from 104 to 106 species in one gram of soil (Torsvik et al. 1990; Gans et al. 2005). Soil micro-organisms are vital for plant growth, nutrient cycling, decomposition and soil quality, yet relatively little is known about the role of biodiversity in this context. Characteristics of soil structure such as aggregation develop as a result of numerous factors including wet-dry cycles, clay flocculation, root activity, burrowing by soil organisms, fungal hyphal activity and microbial exudation (Tisdall and Oades 1982; Dexter 1988; Kleinfelder et al. 1992; Czarnes et al. 2000; Bossuyt et al. 2001; Denef et al. 2002; Scullion et al. 2002). Tisdall and Oades (1982) stated the importance of bacteria, fungi and roots as binding and stabilising agents within the soil environment, with their temporal contribution ranging from weeks to years. Feeney et al. (2006) suggested that soil structure and water repellency can be influenced by root and microbial activity extremely quickly. Their investigation showed that the number of aggregates of >2000μm and their water repellency both significantly increased over a 30day period; this was attributed to increased fungal activity, particularly in the rhizosphere. These authors used X-ray micro-Computed Tomography (μCT) to show that micro-organisms have an impact on development of soil structure and in particular on pore size distribution within aggregates. It is widely acknowledged that soil microbes significantly contribute to many soil ecosystem functions. What is not known however is how microbially diverse the soil ecosystem needs to be in order to maintain such functions. Relatively few experiments have attempted to differentiate between interacting organisms when considering the relative importance of biota on soil structure (Hallett et al. 2009). Investigations that have concentrated on microbial populations have either been field studies focussing on reclamation or intensification gradients (Gomez et al., 2004), or relatively short-term laboratory culture studies (Franklin and Mills 2006). The dilution method of modifying microbial diversity has been frequently used in mineral soils (Griffiths et al. 2001; Wertz et al. 2006, 2007), peat (Dimitriu et al. 2010) and sewage (Franklin and Mills 2006). It is primarily used as a means of lowering species richness so functional ability can be correlated with biodiversity. Rarely is the function studied in this context related to soil porosity and the development of soil structure. This investigation aimed to measure the relationship between microbial community structure and soil physical properties such as aggregate stability, pore size and pore distribution. Macrocosms of sieved sterile soil were inoculated with one of two dilutions of field soil to create microbial communities differing in species richness. Additional treatments included planting with Plantago lanceolata (± arbuscular mycorrhizal inoculum) or leaving the soil unplanted. The soil pore architecture was quantified from images derived by X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) and Terminal-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (T-RFLP) analysis was used to characterise the microbial communities. Although roots and mycorrhizal fungi influence soil structure through their activity (Tisdall and Oades 1982; Angers and Caron 1998; Czarnes et al. 2000; Read et al. 2003), the relative importance of bacterial and saprotrophic fungal diversity in the development and maintenance of soil structure, has yet to be fully explored. 