The mechanical properties and toughening mechanisms of an epoxy polymer modified with polysiloxane-based core-shell particles  Abstract An epoxy resin, cured using an anhydride hardener, has been modified by the addition of pre-formed polysiloxane core-shell rubber (S-CSR) particles with a mean diameter of 0.18 μm. The glass transition temperature, Tg, of the cured unmodified epoxy polymer was 148 °C, and this was unchanged after the addition of the S-CSR particles. The polysiloxane rubber particles had a Tg of about -100 °C. Atomic force microscopy showed that the S-CSR particles were well-dispersed in the epoxy polymer. The addition of the S-CSR particles reduced the Young's modulus and tensile strength of the epoxy polymer, but at 20 °C the fracture energy, GIc, increased from 117 J/m2 for the unmodified epoxy to 947 J/m2 when 20 wt% of the S-CSR particles were incorporated. Fracture tests were also performed at -55 °C, -80 °C, and -109 °C. The results showed that the measured fracture energy of the S-CSR-modified epoxy polymers decreased significantly below room temperature. For example, at -109 °C, a fracture energy of 481 J/m2 was measured using 20 wt% of S-CSR particles. Nevertheless, this value of toughness still represented a major increase compared with the unmodified epoxy polymer, which possessed a value of GIc of 174 J/m2 at this very low test temperature. Thus, a clear fact that emerged was that the addition to the epoxy polymer of the S-CSR particles may indeed lead to significant toughening of the epoxy, even at temperatures as low as about -100 °C. The toughening mechanisms induced by the S-CSR particles were identified as (a) localised plastic shear-band yielding around the particles and (b) cavitation of the particles followed by plastic void growth of the epoxy polymer. These mechanisms were modelled using the Hsieh et al. approach [33,49] and the values of GIc of the S-CSR-modified epoxy polymers at the different test temperatures were calculated. Excellent agreement was found between the predictions and the experimentally measured fracture energies. Further, the experimental and modelling results of the present study indicated that the extent of plastic void growth was suppressed at low temperatures for the S-CSR-modified epoxy polymers, but that the localised shear-band yielding mechanism was relatively insensitive to the test temperature. Graphical abstract Highlights • An epoxy polymer has been modified with polysiloxane core-shell rubber particles. • The epoxy had Tg of about 148 °C and the particles had a Tg of about -100 °C. • AFM showed that the particles were well-dispersed in the epoxy polymer. • The addition of 20 wt% particles increased GIc from about 120 J/m2 to 950 J/m2. • The particles also significantly toughened the epoxy polymer even at about -100 °C.  Introduction Epoxy polymers are a class of high-performance thermosetting polymers which are widely used for the matrices of fibre-reinforced composite materials and as adhesives. They are known for their excellent engineering properties, such as high modulus, low creep, high strength, and good thermal and dimensional stabilities. However, epoxy polymers have inherently low toughness and impact resistance due to their highly crosslinked structure. This structure leads to brittle behaviour and causes the polymers to suffer from relatively poor resistance to crack initiation and growth. To improve the toughness of epoxy polymers, it has been established that the incorporation of a second micro-phase of a dispersed rubber, e.g. Refs. [1-5], or a thermoplastic polymer, e.g. Ref. [6-8], can increase the toughness. Here the rubber or thermoplastic particles are typically about 0.1-5 μm in diameter with a volume fraction of about 5-20%. The particles are typically well-dispersed, and formed by reaction-induced phase-separation. However, the particle size is difficult to control as it is dependent on the curing conditions, and hence cannot be varied systematically without changing the properties of the epoxy polymer. An alternative route to increase the toughness of epoxy polymers is to use core-shell rubber (CSR) particles. These particles comprise a soft rubbery core within a harder shell. The particles are typically formed by emulsion polymerisation, and then dispersed in the epoxy resin. Hence, it is readily possible to produce particles with a controlled particle size, unlike with phase-separating rubbers. A range of core and shell materials may be used, and multilayer particles are common [9]. The shell is chosen to be compatible with the epoxy polymer, and poly(methylmethacrylate), which is sometimes functionalised, is often used. Typical core materials include polybutadiene [10] and acrylate-polyurethane rubbers [11]. They have been shown to increase the toughness of both bulk polymers and fibre composites, e.g. Refs. [12-15]. Hayes and Seferis [16] have reviewed the use of CSR particles in thermoset polymers and composites; this review also discusses some of the other properties that can be affected by the incorporation of CSR particles. However, although the properties of these rubber-toughened epoxy polymers have been investigated extensively, only a few studies have reported the low-temperature performance of these rubber-toughened epoxies. In general, the literature [5,17-19] reports that the fracture toughness of rubber-toughened epoxy polymers decreases as the temperature decreases, except at very low temperatures (possibly having passed the β-transition of the polymer) where the fracture toughness appears to increase somewhat again. It is generally accepted that the major toughening mechanism of rubber-toughened epoxies is based on a series of deformation processes, namely (a) localised plastic shear-band yielding around the rubber particles and (b) cavitation of the S-CSR particles followed by plastic void growth of the epoxy polymer. It has been noted [1,3,5] that this second mechanism needs to be operative in order to typically achieve major increases in the toughness of the rubber-particle-modified epoxy polymer. This suggests that using rubber particles with a relatively very low glass transition temperature, Tg, may enable cavitation of the rubber particles at very low test temperatures, and as a result allow plastic void growth of the epoxy polymer even at relatively low temperatures. Hence, the present work used pre-formed polysiloxane core-shell rubber (S-CSR) particles which possess a relatively very low Tg of -100 °C to toughen an anhydride-cured epoxy polymer. The room-temperature and low-temperature mechanical properties and fracture energy of these S-CSR particle-toughened epoxy polymers were determined. Also, the blend morphology, structure/property relationship, and thermal-mechanical behaviour of the modified epoxy polymers were ascertained. Further, the toughening mechanisms involved were also identified, and analytical models were used to predict the modulus, yield stress and fracture energy. 