Reorganisation of brain networks in frontotemporal dementia and progressive supranuclear palsy  Abstract The disruption of large-scale brain networks is increasingly recognised as a consequence of neurodegenerative dementias. We assessed adults with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia and progressive supranuclear palsy using magnetoencephalography during an auditory oddball paradigm. Network connectivity among bilateral temporal, frontal and parietal sources was examined using dynamic causal modelling. We found evidence for a systematic change in effective connectivity in both diseases. Compared with healthy subjects, who had focal modulation of intrahemispheric frontal-temporal connections, the patient groups showed abnormally extensive and inefficient networks. The changes in connectivity were accompanied by impaired responses of the auditory cortex to unexpected deviant tones (MMNm), despite normal responses to standard stimuli. Together, these results suggest that neurodegeneration in two distinct clinical syndromes with overlapping profiles of prefrontal atrophy, causes a similar pattern of reorganisation of large-scale networks. We discuss this network reorganisation in the context of other focal brain disorders and the specific vulnerability of functional brain networks to neurodegenerative disease. Highlights • We compare two distinct neurodegenerative syndromes with prefrontal atrophy. • We show both diseases impair the automatic detection of change (MMNm). • Using DCM we discover that both diseases lead to similar network reorganisation. • We suggest principled network reorganisation in response to prefrontal degeneration.  Introduction A key challenge to understanding the effects of neurodegeneration is to characterise the changing patterns of brain network connectivity, in response to both the disease and its treatment (Pievani et al., 2011; Seeley et al., 2009; Warren et al., 2012). The network paradigm of disease has many advantages, with the potential to elucidate selective vulnerability to a given neuropathology, explains the consequences of disease at a macroscopic level, and increases sensitivity of tools such as brain imaging that captures both integrative and segregated brain functions (Bassett and Bullmore, 2009; Mesulam, 1990). Many studies examine macroscopic networks using task-free 'resting state' paradigms, in which coactivation of distributed regions, or coherence among spontaneous neural oscillators, is thought to reflect functional networks (Corbetta, 2010). In response to task demands or experimental conditions, these networks are rapidly reconfigured to create a dynamic neuronal workspace for cognitive processing (Kitzbichler et al., 2011). Neurodegenerative syndromes commonly disrupt such large scale networks (Rowe, 2010). For example, reductions in resting state connectivity mirror disease related changes in anatomical structure and connectivity with Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementias and Parkinsonian syndromes (Greicius, 2008; Greicius et al., 2004; Seeley et al., 2009; Whitwell et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2010). Task based network configuration can also be changed by focal degeneration and atrophy (Sonty et al., 2007). However, neurodegeneration not only weakens specific network connections, but can also lead to reorganisation of the networks by enhancing connectivity among the relatively unaffected regions (Seeley et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2010). Moreover, recent studies have emphasized the concordance between reductions in network connectivity during resting state and the distinctive focal atrophy patterns in neurodegenerative dementias (Seeley et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2010) or changes in white matter tracts supporting those networks (Raj et al., 2012). Different clinical syndromes can result in specific changes to brain networks, but there may also be generic reorganisation in response to degeneration associated with diverse pathologies. In this study, we examined two distinct neurodegenerative diseases and asked whether disease specific neurodegeneration is related to particular network changes, or whether there is a 'transdiagnostic' network-level response affecting the macroscopic network dynamics. We examined behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP); two rapidly progressive neurodegenerative diseases that have key differences in clinical phenotypes. bvFTD is characterised by changes in behaviour, cognition and personality (Rascovsky et al., 2011). In contrast, PSP is defined by a vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, akinetic rigidity and falls (Litvan et al., 2003; Richardson et al., 1963), with typically milder cognitive impairment including apathy. The two syndromes have distinct and overlapping macroscopic anatomy of tissue loss. bvFTD is associated with marked atrophy of prefrontal cortex (orbital, ventral and/or medial), anterior insula, anterior cingulate and anterior temporal lobes including cortex and the amygdala (Schroeter et al., 2007, 2008; Seelaar et al., 2011; Seeley, 2010; Seeley et al., 2009), although other atrophy patterns with temporoparietal atrophy have been reported (Whitwell et al., 2009). In PSP atrophy is severe in the upper brain stem and superior cerebellar peduncle, with moderate atrophy of medial prefrontal cortex, insula/frontal operculum, cingulate cortex, precentral gyrus and superior parietal lobule (Brenneis et al., 2004; Chiu et al., 2012; Ghosh et al., 2012; Nicoletti et al., 2008). To compare the impact of bvFTD and PSP on macroscopic functional brain networks, we used an auditory oddball paradigm, providing a physiological measure of automatic change detection. Such paradigms include a stream of 'standard' stimuli, interspersed with 'deviant' stimuli (e.g. differing from the standard by pitch or duration). This unpredictable change elicits a robust electrophysiological mismatch negativity signal (MMN, or MMNm in the context of MEG studies), detectable by electro- or magneto-encephalography in auditory cortex between 100ms and 200ms after the onset of the deviant tone. This signal has been proposed as a marker of psychiatric and degenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia (Naatanen et al., 2011, 2012). Moreover, from a basic science perspective, change detection is an important element of higher order cognitive functions, such as attention and memory (cf. Naatanen et al., 2007). In addition to the auditory cortex, other brain regions contribute to the generation of the MMN response. These include prefrontal cortex (Boly et al., 2011; Doeller et al., 2003; Liasis et al., 2001; Rosburg et al., 2005; Schall et al., 2003), which is necessary for early change detection through frontal to temporal feedback connections (Alain et al., 1998; Alho et al., 1994; Garrido et al., 2009a). Parietal cortex is also associated with the MMN, in both electrophysiological (Hsiao et al., 2010; Marco-Pallares et al., 2005) and fMRI studies (Molholm et al., 2005). To measure the network connectivity among these frontal, temporal and parietal cortical sources, we adopted dynamic causal modelling for magnetoencephalography data. Magnetoencephalography is sensitive to the spatiotemporal effects of bvFTD during cognitive tasks (Hughes et al., 2011), proportional to clinical deficits, and well tolerated by patients as a functional brain imaging modality. Dynamic causal modelling has several advantages over other methods to test our hypotheses, including (1) empirical priors that introduce biophysical constraints on the network models; (2) the use of generative (predictive) models that can be tested against the observed data, and evaluated and compared using objective measures of the model evidences; and (3) embodying different hypotheses about the impact of disease on network structures and connectivity in explicit and directional spatiotemporal network models. Dynamic causal modelling also incorporates the modulatory effects of experimental manipulations on connections, such as the difference between standard and deviant stimuli, providing evidence of the critical connections for change detection (Kiebel et al., 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009). We used dynamic causal modelling to measure network connectivity underlying the detection of change. We included different families of network models to test two principal hypotheses. First, we predicted that the network recruited in health for change detection would be altered by disease. Specifically, since bvFTD and PSP have prefrontal neuropathology, we predicted that network reorganisation would lead to more distributed networks with enhanced connectivity among the less affected parietal regions. Secondly, we predicted that disease would also affect the modulation of the network by the experimental context (i.e. the difference between the standard and deviant tones). Thus, we not only predict that patients will have a change in network architecture, but also a change in the dynamic modulation of connectivity from trial to trial. A corollary of this network change is reduced automatic detection of unpredictable change, and therefore a reduction in amplitudes and delayed latency of the MMNm response in the auditory cortex. 